
   John Jennings
   THE RAIDER
   Producer's Note
   Jennings, John, 1906-1973

   About Internet Archive Daisy Books
   This book was produced in DAISY format by the Internet Archive. The book pages were scanned and converted to DAISY format automatically. This process relies on optical character recognition, and is somewhat susceptible to errors. These errors may include weird characters, non-words, and incorrect guesses at structure. Page numbers and headers or footers may remain from the scanned page. The Internet Archive is working to improve the scanning process and resulting books, but in the meantime, we hope that this book will be useful to you.
   P.S.Исправлено множество (свыше тысячи) ошибок оцифровки, но какая-то часть их могла остаться незамеченной или нерасшифрованной.

   Contents
   Preface                               5
   I. Knights of the Swan           9
   II. The Little Cloud             57
   III. Shadow on the Wind     109   
   IV. Monsoon Seas               153
   V. Gott mit Uns                 199

   THE RAIDER
   The chronicle of a gallant ship
   A novel of World War I
   Preface
   I have labeled the tale that follows "A Novel." And so it is. Yet paradoxically enough it is by no means all fiction. Many a younger man than I will recall that there was such a ship as the Emden, a German light cruiser, which operated in the far reaches of the Pacific and in the Indian Ocean during World War I, whose daring exploits made her name a byword throughout the world. There were such men as Kapitan Karl von Mueller and Helmuth von Muecke, von Guerard and Gyssling, von Hohenzollern, Schall, and Lauterbach, to name but a few. Oberhoboistenmaat Wecke conducted the ship's band at Tsingtao. The officers' cook was a civilian— though whether his name was Herman, as I have dubbed him, the record does not say. Furthermore, he did have a cat which gave birth to kittens in Leutnant Schall's lap, to the great glee of all his shipmates, as I have described, and his fate was as it has been told here. Oberleutnant Lauterbachwas a reservist. He did command the Hamburg-Amerika liner Staats-sekretar Kratke, and was in port at Tsingtao at the outbreak of the war. Later, when the Emden captured a British vessel in the Indian Ocean, he did, once more, encounter an Englishwoman who had sailed with him as a passenger not longbefore. It has seemed to me significant that there were no recriminations.
   But it would be impossible for me to cite all such actual occurrences in the space of a brief preface. I have named only a few of them here to show that wherever it has been possible I have gone to the record for my material.
   In the interest of accuracy this has been most important. What has seemed to me much more significant, however, has been the overshadowing fact of the event itself: the very brief career of the Emden, and those few months in the lives of the men who sailed her.
   The Emden was on the other side during that conflict of 1914-1918. She was Russia's enemy at the beginning; then France's, then England's, and finally Japan's before her career was cut short by an Australian cruiser. She would have been our enemy, too, had she survived that long. And yet not even from her bitterest foes has there ever come any criticism or disparagement of her conduct. She fought her war in the only way she could; in the way that was expected of her— alone and with honor, boldly, audaciously, unflinching, and above all, with a touch of gallantry and chivalry; qualities that no longer seem to exist in war.
   If we cannot admire the forces for which her crew fought, we must allow them the courage of their convictions. Everything they had been taught from childhood to honor and respect and revere was on the board; and from the moment they turned away from the fleet, outside Pagan, and bore southward on their lonely mission into the Indian Ocean, there could not have been a moment's doubt in the mind of any man on board as to their ultimate fate. They knew that by that act they became a ship without a port, men without homes. There were few harbors in the world that stood ready to receive them—and those few lay far away, halfway around the world, and blocked against them. Only so long as their food and fuel remained could they keep the sea freely. After that the end was obvious: soon or late the jaws of the trap must snap, and they would be caught. For some—how many of them, who could tell?—it could mean only death. For others there would be life without living—blinded, maimed, crippled. For the rest, save for a very few who might by some freak manage to escape, there would be life as a prisoner of war for an indefinite length of time and under unknown conditions.
   And still, even knowing this, not for a single instant did any one of them hesitate. To a man they remained steadfast and loyal to the ideals and concepts they believed in, to the obligations they had sworn to defend. Whether those concepts and obligations were right or wrong is not for us to consider here. Our honor is to the men who had-die integrity to face Destiny without flinching in support of their beliefs, and to the ship they sailed. I think their story is worthy of retelling.
   John Jennings,
   Carmel, New York
   1962

   I
   KNIGHTS OF THE SWAN
   Frederick II, Elector of Brandenburg, founded the Order of the Swan in 1443. It was restored by Frederick William IV of Prussia in 1843. The cruiser Emden was known as the "Swan of the East."

   The sun was setting behind the ragged rim of the Shantung Hills as they prepared to go on shore. Its last golden rays sent soft purple shadows lengthening over the bare brown slopes and into the folded hollows, and then ran out along the crescent curve of the beach toward the city' and sparkled on the quiet waters of Kiaochow Bay. Northward the Lao-shan Mountains, their crags and creases normally hazy through the summer's day, stood out sharp and clear, looming large in the evening air. Eastward the Rusham Hills, separating the bay and the city from the pounding of the Yellow Sea, glowed pink and gold in the late night. Over by die commercial docks the black hull and yellow masts and funnels of the big Hamburg-Amerika liner Staatssekretar Kratke stood out sharply amid the mass of smaller shipping—the freighters and colliers and junks and sampans moored or massed in the harbor, lying along the great mole, or clustered thickly in the shelter of the cove in a sort of floating squalor, typical of the China coast.
   Along the waterfront boulevard the gaslights came on, one by one—a modem German innovation that seemed somehow slightly incongruous in spite of the bustle and Teutonic efficiency of the little city. In the center of the Kronprinzessensplatz, the tiny, meticulously laid out, and carefully manicured park that fronted on the water just diagonally across the boulevard from the Imperial dockyard, the Emden's band, under the direction of Uberhoboistenmaat Wecke, was opening the evening concert with a stirring rendition of "Die Wacht am Rhein," as tradition prescribed. Across the way, beyond the park, bxit still facing the reach of the bay, rimmed in lights through the trees and the fragrant gathering dusk, loomed die imposing bulk of Government House. Beyond it, also fronting on the tree-lined Prinz Heinrich Strasse, on the comer of the Friedrichstrasse, the tall, thin twin spires of the Lutheran church towered against the still faintly glowing sky likethe spikes of a pair of guardsmen's helmets.
   At the gangway Karl von Mueller paused. He was the Kapitan-Kommandant of the Emden, and for the moment at least, during the Admiral's absence, senior officer present at Tsingtao. Two paces behind him and obliquely from his left shoulder his tall, thin-faced, blue-eyed, and blond-mustached first officer and executive, Helmuth von Muecke, also stopped abruptly, clicked his heels, and stood stiffly, correctly, at attention. Beside the gangway the marines and side boys, duly prescribed by the regulations, leaped to a like posture, and the officer of the watch saluted smartly.
   Von Mueller ran a critical blue-gray eye over them professionally, then returned the watch officer's salute almost perfunctorily, yet with enough hint of a smile to denote his official approval.
   "Everything under control, Hans?" he demanded.
   "Everything, Herr Kapitan," replied Oberleutnant Hans von Levetzow, second gunnery officer, at the moment saddled with the watch on board. "The usual shore parties have already left the ship. I have the first dog watch. Kapitanleutnant Gropius will have the second. We will both be on duty to check the returns at midnight. We anticipate no difficulty."
   "Very good, Herr Oberleutnant," said von Mueller. "But keep your eyes open. Remember, Leutnant Lange is popular with all hands. It might be that some of the men might go a little bit overboard in celebrating—shall we say?—his good fortune."
   "I have thought of the possibility, Herr Kapitan." Von Levetzow tried hard to suppress a grin. His brown eyes twinkled, and his round, good-humored face struggled against discipline. "I will not forget it."
   "Good!" Von Mueller nodded. "I'm sorry you can't be with us, Hans, but someone must stay on board, and yours seems to have been the short straw."
   "Think nothing of it, Herr Kapitan!" This time, von Levetzow smiled openly, since it was evident that the Captain's mood was jocular. "Though I thank you. I have been to weddings before, and somehow I find them not entirely unlike funerals. I prefer to stay where I am."
   "In that case, Herr Oberleutnant, you will not mind if we take an extra glass of champagne and kiss the bride for you," von Mueller chuckled. "Come along, Helmuth. We mustn't keep the wedding pair waiting, you know."
   At the gates of the dockyard they turned up through the little park toward the brightly lighted church, returning the salutes of Wecke and the band and many of the audience as they went.
   "There's no sense in taking a rickshaw for that little distance," von Mueller remarked.
   "Scarcely, Kapitan," von Muecke agreed.
   "Just be careful not to get your boots dusty," the Captain smiled. "As best man you'll be on display for a few moments."
   "Ummm! Ja, ja, Karl! I have not forgotten."
   Von Mueller shot him an amused glance. A quartet of passing seamen saluted smartly, demanding their attention for a moment. By the time they had punctiliously returned the men's greeting they had passed beyond the bandstand and the circle of listeners and were not far from the church. The Captain nodded toward it, calling his companion's attention to the colorful crowds climbing up the wide steps, pausing for a moment of greeting at the top, then passing on through the bright doorway. Von Mueller slackened his pace slightly. If there was anything he hated, it was sitting on a hard church pew, squirming and waiting for things to get under way. Tonight it would be even more disquieting, for since he stood in loco parentis to the groom, being his commanding officer, he would be given the front pew on the young man's side, and accordingly, would share the limelight, at least until the appearance of the wedding part)', with the family of the bride, the Baron Governor and Madame von Meyer-Waldeck.
   "Apparently you'll have an excellent audience," he remarked.
   "So I see!" Von Muecke shrugged resignedly. "They both assured me that it would be a small wedding, and now— look! I wonder what they would call a large one."
   "Are you surprised?" von Mueller retorted. "After all, Bunte is a popular boy, and Use is the Governor's daughter as well as a lovely girl in her own right. They both have a host of friends. How could you expect it to be otherwise? Don't tell me you are beginning to get cold feet!"
   14
   Otto was Leutnant Lange's true given name, but to everyone in the fleet, as well as up and down the China coast, he was better known as "Bunte." He was the youngest officer on board the Emden and a general favorite with all hands.
   Von Muecke ran a cautious finger around his immaculate wing collar and gingerly adjusted his black bow tie. "Not just beginning to, Karl," he replied. "You know how I feel about these affairs. I've been so close to one before—and I never will again if I can help it!"
   The Captain burst out laughing. "You really believe that? My friend, the whole ship has been talking about your romance with the Englishwoman, Caroline Grey. If what they are saying is true, when she suggests the altar you'll be happy to have the starring role."
   "For a confirmed bachelor, Karl, you seem very willing to see me give up my freedom."
   "Only because I believe you're so anxious to do so. Helmuth, I'll make you bet—five hundred Marks—Christmas will see you a married man."
   For the first time since they had left the ship, von Muecke smiled. "Whatever you say, Karl. It was your suggestion, and you should make the terms. Either way, I will be the winner because if I do marry you will have to give me a suitable present."
   They came to the curb, under the lindens along Prinz Heinrich Strasse, opposite the church at the end of the bordered path through the Kronprinzessensplatz. There by unspoken mutual consent they paused to let the traffic in the street before them move on and the crowds on the church steps thin out a little.
   Von Muecke rubbed his hands together. It seemed to Karl von Mueller that his executive officer had brightened considerably.
   "Well!" said von Muecke. "No use wailing about it. This time, at least, it is theirs—not yours or mine. Let's hope the turnout is a good omen. It should give them a gay send-off, at any rate."
   Von Mueller suddenly sobered, remembering the most recent dispatches from Berlin. "Ach, ja!" he said. "Let us hope so—for the omen, anyway. For the send-off—" He shrugged.
   "Let us hope it does not come too soon, that it does not postpone their lives together!"
   The exec looked at him quickly. "You have heard something?"
   Von Mueller shook his head. "Only that the situation continues tense in Europe," he replied. "Austria, Serbia, France, and Russia, England—even ourselves—are calling one another diplomatic names and making threats. It seems to be getting worse, though I don't see how the situation can deteriorate much further without war. If that happens, then our bride and groom may have a short honeymoon!"
   "Ach! These diplomats!" von Muecke scoffed. "They will bristle a bit and then settle it among themselves. You will see!"
   Von Mueller shrugged. "Let's hope so. But don't forget that our own orders for Yangtze patrol have already been canceled. That is a small thing, but it is a straw to show how the wind blows. The Kaiserin Elizabeth is another."
   "Oh, but that is just a courtesy' call!" von Muecke exclaimed.
   "It is nothing of the sort, and you know it, Helmuth!" the Captain retorted. "The Austrians are more than a little afraid of war with Russia, and they prefer to be here among friends if it comes, rather than out on the open sea!"
   "Nonsense!" von Muecke scoffed. "They are playboys, all of them, these Austrians. You know that, Karl. They come here to drink our champagne and eat our caviar and flirt with our women. That is more fun for them than sailing on an empty ocean!"
   "I hope you are right, Helmuth, but only time will tell. Perhaps the Governor will have some more recent news for us. He is in closer touch with Berlin than I am. Come! Let us go. The crowd is thinning, and they are probably ready for us. You—have the ring?"
   "I have even an extra one in case the other should be lost, Herr Kapitan!" Von Muecke grinned.
   "Trust a bachelor!" said von Mueller.

   The church was already well filled when they entered, and the ushers—all of them shipmates of the groom, resplendent in stiff-starched, full-dress tropical whites smartly set off by black belts with Imperial brass buckles, gold-hilted dress swords in shiny patent-leather scabbards, bright-polished buttons, and gilt insignia of rank—were obviously well occupied seeing each guest to his or her proper place among the friends of the bride or the friends of the groom. Nevertheless, at the appearance of the two senior officers two of the ushers came for\vard. Quite evidently it had been well planned beforehand.
   Karl von Mueller watched them approach with approval, and a certain pride. They carried themselves well, and behaved with assurance as well as decorum. They were a credit to the Emden and—he might be pardoned a twinge of pride —himself. The pair came to a halt before them, clicked their heels politely, and bowed. Doubtless that was as close to military punctilio as they could come in this place.
   "Gentlemen!" Von Mueller and von Muecke together meticulously returned the salutation.
   Von Mueller smiled a little, inwardly, to note that scrubbed, freshly shaved, and in full dress even monkey-browed, flat-faced Leutnant Rudi Voss, with his black shoe-brush haircut and bright black eyes—notoriously the ugliest, as well as the wealthiest, man on board—looked somehow impressive. Subleutnant Franz Josef von Hohenzollem, on the other hand, looked exactly as one would expect—suave, well groomed, carefully mannered; his uniform, expensively and carefully tailored in Berlin, had every extra flair that the regulations allowed. On another ship, von Mueller reflected, Franz would have sported a monocle. The eyepieces were much in vogue in certain circles of German society at the moment, and the only reason there were so few of them on board the Emden was that Kapitan von Mueller himself had refused to wear one.
   He had explained it in the wardroom. "The only real reason for a monocle," he had said over a friendly glass of Pilsener, "is to correct the vision of one eye. Tell me if I am wrong, Herr Doktor Luther. If that is so, then to wear such a thing would be to admit that I do not have the perfect coordinate vision that, in my position, is expected of me. Following my next physical examination, I would probably be ordered to one desk or another in the Wilhelmstrasse. I would not like that, gentlemen. Would you?"
   After that the only monocles aboard the Emden were those worn by the Stabsarzt, Herr Doktor Luther himself, the ships surgeon, and the Marine Oberzahlmeister Woychokowsky, the purser-paymaster, for neither of whom was perfect eye-sight considered requisite to their duties.
   "Herr Kapitan! Herr Kapitanleutnant!" Though he was the junior officer present, Franz von Hohenzollern seemed easily to assume leadership here, and even von Mueller did not protest. Actually the boy was far from handsome. He had the large Hapsburg nose and small Hapsburg mouth and pale Hapsburg eyes. Yet because of his social-and it must be admitted. Imperial-connections he had been unanimously chosen president of the officers' mess and chief of officers' commissary. As such he was also the ship's social arbiter and was responsible for all of the cruiser's parties, from the serving of the food and wine to the music and dancing The success of all their occasions attested his ability and charm in that direction, while at the same time, curiously enough he was an excellent, efficient, and conscientious second torpedo officer, respected and liked by his men.
   ''We have been expecting you, gentlemen," he went on. "Kapitanleutnant von Muecke, the groom is waiting for you in the vestry. Leutnant Voss will take you there. Herr Kapitan, if you will follow me, please?"
   Von Mueller suppressed a smile. "Thank you, Franz," he replied gravely, and fell in behind the younger officer.
   Heads turned as they went, as well they might. For all his forty years Karl von MueUer was still a handsome man; tall, well built, blue-eyed, straight-nosed, and with a mouth that was wide enough to smile when it should, but still tight enough to be grim when necessary. In his starched, full-dress ""T' ,^T .^' "^^ ^^^ aiguillettes and epaulettes, ribbons and gold braid, he was a figure to command attention. In his position as senior officer present on the German East Asiatic Station, pro tem, he was of even greater interest.
   The foremost pew left him still conspicuous, but at least there he felt a little more like a ship's commander on his own bridge. He made his proper genuflection and went through the wordless ritual of prayer, though all he could really think of at the moment was the disturbing news that kept coming from Berlin. If it was true, these youngsters might have a short start. For their sakes, if for none other, he hoped it was not so. Yet it was a fact that everyone—not just those on board ship, but everyone who in any way represented the Imperial house in the Rasz —had already accepted whatever destiny might have to offer. Their eyes were open. They had all sworn—even in their mothers' wombs, it seemed to him— to make the German Empire all-ruling; its power everywhere felt.
   He had scarcely settled back in his pew when the organ burst into the wedding march, and everyone behind him stood up and turned to watch the bridal procession as it came down the aisle. Von Mueller did the same, and as he did so, out of the comer of his eye he saw young Lange emerge from the vestry, beside Helmuth von Muecke, followed by the starched and stiffly uniformed ushers.
   The bride, he had to admit, was radiant beyond description. He did not recognize the flowers that she carried, for they were of some exotic oriental variety, but whatever they happened to be they were exquisite, and their strong shades of gold and coral and blue served admirably to set off the child's own delicate blonde loveliness. She seemed to have about her the freshness of spring, despite the midsummer heat of the China coast; the beauty of expectant seasons in a fairer land. If he had not been such a confirmed, determined bachelor himself, von Mueller reflected, he might even have found it in his heart to envy his young lieutenant. As it was, he had no difficulty hoping that they both would enjoy every good thing that life could offer.
   The bride's father, the Governor, Baron von Meyer-Waldeck, he found rather less imposing, he realized with a small sense of guilt. After all, the Governor was, in a manner of speaking, his superior officer and as such deserved the same unswerving devotion and allegiance that was given to the Emperor. But somehow von Mueller could not quite bring himself to that state of mind. As they came down the aisle, it seemed to Kapitan von Mueller that the old gentleman looked rather like a pouter pigeon—all puffed up with pride. Pompous was the only single word von Mueller could think of to describe him, but he supposed with a certain charity that the Baron might really be excused. If the bridegroom had no von to his name, he was still no inconsiderable catch. Subleutnant Lange was a capable officer and should go far in the service—might even earn a title for himself. And in any case, it was scarcely an occasion that would be repeated often.
   As the procession came to a slow halt before the altar, von Mueller turned in unison with the rest of the congregation to face the front of the church. As he did so, his eyes automatically swept over the members of the wedding party, almost unconsciously noting and identifying each in passing.
   Subleutnant Lange, the groom, stood nearest—spare, sandy-haired, gray-eyed, and just at the moment deadly serious. Beyond him, on the other side of the aisle, his ushers, all fellow officers, ranged toward the vestry door, standing in order of rank. Kapitanleutnant Ludwig von Braun, tall, thin, slightly stooped, and graying a little, camefirst. As chief supply officer he did not exactly merit the place, but it had been assigned him out of deference to the fact that he was the oldest officer on board. Karl von Mueller wondered whether the man's wife, Alexandra, had deigned to come. He doubted it. The woman was practically a professional invalid, a chronic hypochondriac, thoroughly self-centered and incessantly whining. So far as the Captain was concerned, she was invaluable, for she was a constant reminder of the delights of bachelorhood, but he felt she would scarcely be missed at any such gathering as this.
   Kapitanleutnant Dirk Gaede, lean, dark, and ramrod-stiff, deadly earnest in everything, an excellent chief gunnery officer, was next. After him came Oberleutnant Kurt von Witthoeft, slight, happy-go-lucky, good humored, as seemed to be the nature of torpedo officers; Leutnant Oscar Ellenbroek, the stolid, chunky chief marine engineer; Leutnant Anton von Guerard, young, jaunty and Alsatian, the Emden's communications officer; Leutnant Eric Schali, half English, and the youngest of their division officers.
   Leutnant Rudolph—"Rudi"—Voss was next to the last, and even though von Mueller saw him many times daily he could not help glancing at him twice. There was something almost fascinating in the man's ugliness. It was bad enough that he was short and square-built, with black beetling brows and hairy hands, but when an almost apelike cast of features was added the effect was startling, indeed. Yet there was not a greater heart in the entire Navy nor an officer better liked by his shipmates.
   Still and all, it had come as a considerable surprise to everyone when, during their last official visit to Sydney, Rudi had abruptly married a beautiful musical hall chorine named Gertrude Nickerson. Of course, when von Mueller stopped to think about it, the logic of the sudden mating was clear to him. As a member of the fabulous Krupp family on his mother's side young Voss was almost indecently wealthy, and he must have seemed a rare opportunity to a girl of Trudi's background. No doubt she had long sickened of being pawed in low-grade night clubs, and had simply made up her mind to close her eves to his appearance and accept the brrter with the sweet. Rudi, on the other hand, had always been accustomed to having women shudder and shy away at the very sight of him. To have one—and an undeniably lovely one—even look twice in his direction was all that he needed. The rest, so far as Trudi was concerned, at least, had been simple.
   For a time von Mueller had even thought that it might work out. But fudging from recent signs, he suspected the honeymoon was over for Trudi, anyway. Hers was hardly a steadfast character, and time had brought the inevitable revulsion. Fortunately for him. Rudi was still as deeply in love with his bride as ever, and had not yet noticed the all too obvious signs. Von Mueller shuddered to think what would happen when the discovery came. Indeed, he was more than a little worried already, for since the arrival of the Austrian cruiser Kaiserin Elizabeth a few days ago Trudi had been almost blatant in her flirtations with the Austrian officers.
   At least, he thought somberly, that would be the bright side of mobilization, or even war, if it came. Either would send them racing to sea and away from Tsingtao, and for a time at least, Rudi's feelings would be spared.
   But these were somber thoughts for such an occasion. His eyes moved on to Subleutnant Franz von Hohenzollern, the last in line, and at once he began to feel better. For all his failings, Franz was a cheerful fellow—a little on the lightweight side, perhaps, but nonetheless always good-humored, always gay; a man who could be counted upon to carry almost any social gathering on to success. As his name indicated, he boasted at least a remote connection with the Emperor, and this alone was enough to insure hima welcome wherever he went. Thus it might be said that in more ways than one he kept them all supplied with truffles and caviar, and between him, in his capacity as mess president, and stout Herman Schultz, the line civilian chef whom he had insisted upon engaging for the officers' galley, the Emden had come to enjoy an enviable reputation for the excellence of her entertainment and the quality of her cuisine. Indeed, whenever he was in port the old Admiral, the Count von Spec himself, made no secret of his preference for dining aboard the cruiser rather than in his own cabin, aboard the flagship.
   The Captain's musings were cut short abruptly by a final booming crescendo from the organ, followed by complete, almost intense silence. He turned away from the row of stiffly uniformed ushers and looked dutifully to the front, toward the wedding party. The Bishop already stood at the altar rail, facing the young couple, his prayer book open in his hand, looking out over their heads almost forbiddingly, waiting—waiting. When the silence was at last thick and absolute, his voice boomed out:
   "Dearly beloved . . . !"
   Kapitan Karl von Mueller scarcely considered himself a connoisseur of such matters. To him it seemed that weddings were dull, dreary affairs. Accordingly, he was rather pleasantly surprised when in this case, once the ceremony was actually under way, the thing seemed to run off more rapidly than usual. Almost before he was aware that they had started, the whole thing was done and young Lange was kissing his new bride. The organ was triumphantly striking up the traditional recessional march.
   Perhaps, von Mueller thought, it was just that he was so preoccupied with events in Europe that he was not fully aware of the passage of time.
   The great reception hall, up the gracefully sweeping circular staircase at Government House, where visiting dignitaries were welcomed and affairs of state were customarily held, had already begun to fill when Karl Von Mueller arrived from the church. The receiving line was in full operation, and many had passed on to the champagne and punch bowl and the long tables of hors d'oeuvres that had been spread to precede the formal banquet.
   As he and von Muecke joined the group waiting to pay their formal respects and offer congratulations, he noticed a couple just starting down the receiving line. The man was tall and trim, about his own age, with slightly graying hair, a weather-beaten face, and level gray eyes. He was wearing the uniform of a captain in the merchant service and the ribbon of a reservist. The woman was young and attractive, perhaps some dozen years his junior, with soft brown eyes and dark-honey-colored hair, a wide mouth, and the fresh pink complexion that seemed to stamp her at once as English.
   "Ah, good!" von Mueller exclaimed at sight of them. "There's Lauterbach, of the Kratke. I hoped he would be here. If there's to be trouble, I want him with us."
   There was no reply, and he looked to see if von Muecke had heard him. To his surprise, the exec was staring with an almost stunned expression at the pair. "Helmuth," he said, "did you—"
   "He is with Caroline," von Muecke interrupted, apparently oblivious to all the Captain had said. "She said she was coming alone."
   "Well," said von Mueller dryly, you will be able to ask her yourself in a moment, but if I read the signs correctly, I would say that five hundred Marks are as good as won."
   Von Muecke flushed and made an effort to curb his impatience, but he did not deny the charge.
   When his turn came to move down the line, von Mueller paid his proper and dutiful respects.
   To the bride: "You were charming, Use, my dear girl. I was even jealous myself! Come! A kiss, now, if you expect special preference for your husband. That's customary, you know!"
   To the groom: "Bunte, my boy! She is a prize, indeed, and you are a lucky man—and I might add, a credit to the ship. Well done!"
   And to the bride's mother—^with greater reserve: "It was a beautiful wedding, madame. I am sure they will be most happy together."
   The woman simpered, and von Mueller moved on hastily. Viktoria von Meyer-Waldeck was not one of his favorite hostesses. She was taller than her husband, and more than a little on the sturdy side. She was at least as old as von Mueller himself, yet she assumed an air of demure coyness, as if she were scarcely out of her teens. She always blatantly tried to flirt with him, and he was never comfortable in her presence.
   The Governor himself, Johannes Baron von Meyer-Waldeck, was last in line. An excellent civil servant who ruled his important outpost of Imperial colonialism with true German efficiency, today he seemed disturbed—even distraught.
   "Karl!" he cried with almost obvious relief, brushing aside von Mueller's carefully planned little speech of congratulation as if he had not heard it. "Ach! Karl! I am glad to see you!"
   "Why? What's wrong, Johannes?" They were on first-name terms.
   "Everything! Everything, Karl!" The Baron Governor shook his head dramatically. "Just before the wedding, dispatches came from Berlin—but no doubt you got them, too, on board the Emden. They contained orders for you."
   "They had not come when I left the ship," von Mueller replied blankly. "What—"
   "I had not the heart to say anything before," the Governor interrupted him. "Even now—But here is not the place to go into it. We are holding up everything. Go along and have a drink. When I am done here and can slip away, I will find you and we can go then to my study and decide what we must all do."
   "Is it that bad?" von Mueller asked.
   "It is very bad, Karl," said the Governor. "Just how bad, I cannot yet be sure, but I fear it is the worst you or I have ever seen."
   Von Mueller nodded toward the tables. "I'll be over there when you need me," he said.
   "I'll come as soon as I can!"
   "What was that about?" von Muecke demanded. He was looking about for the English girl, as they crossed the floor in the direction of the refreshment tables.
   "I'm not sure," the Captain replied, "But whatever it may be, it is not good."
   "War, do you think?" von Muecke persisted.
   Von Mueller shook his head. "Hardly yet—for us," he replied. "But at the least mobilization, and probably all that such a move implies."
   "The handwriting on the wall, perhaps?" von Muecke suggested.
   "I hate to be the skeleton at the feast," said von Mueller, "but that would be my guess."
   They accepted a glass of Bombay punch at the bar table and moved on from there to the cold collation being served just beyond for a selection of appetizers. To von Mueller's pleased surprise, their own officers' cook, stout Herman Schultz, in an immaculate white apron and tall chef's cap, presided there.
   "Well, Herman, you do seem to get around!" he exclaimed.
   "Ja, Herr Kapitan!" Herman's ruddy face beamed proudly. "The Herr Governor himself begged me that this and the banquet later we do for him, and Leutnant von Hohenzollern gave his approval. For such an occasion could I refuse yet?"
   "Hardly!" the Captain assured him. "And may I add my own blessing to the idea. Now we know for sure that we will be in the best of hands."
   "Danke, Kapitan!" The chef's smile grew even broader. "Of that you may sure be! Right now, in the kitchen, Hilde, meine Frau, overseeing is, and a better cook than I am she is. You will see!"
   "She will have to work hard to prove that," von Mueller laughed.
   "Ach, she will! She will!" replied Herman, suddenly earnest. "Just you watch, Herr Kapitan!"
   "I look forward to a treat, then, Herman," said the Captain.
   Behind him he heard von Muecke's voice, somehow clipped and restrained: "Conrad!—Herr Kapitan Lauterbach —Caroline!" punctuated by the formal click of his heels.
   Von Mueller swung about quickly, impelled by some strange note in his junior's tone, and at once sensed a situation in the making. The young woman, Caroline Grey, was pretty beyond question, even prettier on close examination than she had appeared from a distance; certainly a point that was distinctly in her favor, since it is a rare quality'. At the same time, Conrad Lauterbach was suave and urbane as ever. But despite his complaisance Kapitan von Mueller was conscious of a certain unwonted tension about the man, and from the way his glance flicked from his companion to von Muecke and back again there was little need to speculate why. Clearly the girl was more than a mere passing acquaintance. On the other hand, whatever her relationship to Lauterbach, she was now smiling at von Muecke with frank, almost outspoken interest. As for von Muecke himself, Karl von Mueller need scarcely have sailed for several years with his executive and first officer not to be certain that the rumors that had been circulating the ship for the last month were blatantly true.
   Under ordinary circumstances the situation might have been rather amusing; a source of jest and teasing. No lovely woman yet was born but had more than one admirer, and the question of which might be the best was one to be settled among themselves. But as matters stood, it was no laughing matter.
   To begin with, they were poised at the brink of a dangerous situation. If the Governor's hint meant anything, it was more than likely that the next few hours would find them under orders for full mobilization. Whether or not it would yet come to war would still be a question. But as a reservist Lauterbach would be called to duty on board the Emden. If these two were to be rivals—even comparatively friendly rivals—for the same woman, the situation would scarcely be the easiest imaginable in the wardroom. At the same time, there was an international complication. The girl was English. As the currents presently ran, any future explosion would mean that Germany would support Austria against Russia and her allies, France and Great Britain. What a tragedy for one or both to find themselves abruptly in love with an enemy. How would they react? Which way would their sympathies turn? What would a commanding officer do in their case, knowing their attachment, understanding their dilemma?
   It was scarcely an enviable position for him—or for them. But he reminded himself that such a state of affairs had not yet come about. He was a man who believed in meeting problems as one came to them, not in anticipating them. Just now, it seemed to him, the problem was one of smoothing over the moment. Troubled waters called for oil, andit was his duty to apply it. He stepped forward with outstretched hand.
   "Conrad!" he exclaimed. "I didn't realize you were there. I'm delighted to see you and—er—" He glanced toward the Englishwoman.
   "Forgive me, Karl!" said Lauterbach quickly. "Caroline, this is Kapitan von Mueller, commanding His Imperial Majesty's light cruiser Emden—our senior officer present at Tsingtao just now. Karl, may I present Miss Caroline Grey, one of my passengers on our last voyage out?"
   "Miss Grey!" von Mueller responded, clicking his heels and bowing formally—more than a nod; less than an obeisance. "Welcome to our little world! We are honored, indeed, to be hosts to such beauty. Be assured we will do all we can to deserve it!" He felt silly saying it, but he had been carefully trained, and he noticed that she did not seem insulted.
   "Kapitan von Mueller!" she replied, offering her hand.
   Von Muecke, who had been hovering impatiently during the introduction, now reached out and touched Caroline's arm, but before he could speak the Captain said, "Miss Grey, forgive me. Do you mind if I have a word with Kapitan Lauterbach? We will leave you in good company."
   The exec didn't hesitate, but nodding gently, turned to Caroline. They moved slowly toward the refreshment table.
   Lauterbach stared after them moodily. "Now, see here, Karl!" he protested. "This is a serious situation. That girl—"
   "Yes, yes! I understand, Conrad," von Mueller replied. "But so is war a serious situation. Just now I am afraid that we are all faced with a 'serious situation.' One that may well involve you, and one that might seriously affect her."
   The merchantman stared at him in astonishment. "What do you mean by that?" he demanded.
   "Surely you do have some notion of the state of the world just now!" von Mueller retorted. "How were things at home when you sailed?"
   "Normal enough." Lauterbach looked puzzled. "There was some rumbling in the Balkans, but that is always there. After we sailed, there was the tragedy at Sarajevo, and the Austrians and the Russians have been rattling their sabers at one another since. But you know that's only their usual way. Why? What are you worried about?"
   "Surely you must be aware how the tension has increased since then, Conrad," said von Mueller grimly. "And unfortunately, I can't agree with you that this is mere saber rattling. Between us—and I will ask you to keep it confidential until we have some official word, one way or the other—I expect orders for full mobilization of all naval forces within a matter of hours. I am sure you understand what that means."
   "Mobilization? Total mobilization?" Lauterbach stared at him in startled surprise. "Why—yes, I do understand what that would mean to me. As a reservist I would be called! But are things so sinister? Would it mean so much—to her?" He nodded in the direction of the refreshment table, where Miss Grey and von Muecke were laughing and filling their plates.
   "I am very much afraid it might, Conrad," replied von Mueller. "You must have heard from Reuter's news this afternoon that yesterday Austria declared war and invaded Serbia. By alliance Russia is pledged to support Serbia, and as we are committed to support Austria it looks as if war is inevitable."
   Lauterbach looked unhappy. "This is talk for diplomats, Karl!" he exclaimed. "I'm only a simple sea captain! I carry people of all nations in my ship as passengers, and I find them—what would you expect? Just people. Some are to be admired. Some are miserable! Most are merely ordinary. So far as Miss Grey is concerned, I would class her as extraordinary—the most acceptable of all. In fact, I don't mind admitting that I truly feel more than that about her. If she'd have me, I'd marry her tomorrow!"
   "You mean you'd ask her, Conrad?" said von Mueller.
   "Of course!" Lauterbach looked offended.
   "I would be the last to question your taste, Conrad," von Mueller said, "but if you are really in love with this girl do you think it would be altogether fair?"
   "Fair?" Lauterbach almost exploded. "Fair to whom? To Helmuth? It seems to me quite obvious that he has his guns run out and his decks cleared for action. Do you want me to back down on that account?"
   "Don't be an idiot, Conrad!" said von .Mueller. "I wouldn't take sides in so personal a matter if I could. But remember, the girl is English. We are German. And our countries are on the verge of war. Whether or not that happens is yet to be seen, but—"
   "But? But what, Kapitan von Mueller?" The merchant officer was obviously ready to take offense. "Must we—"
   Von Mueller looked resigned. "Decide? Is that for us, Kapitan Lauterbach? The situation is such that neither you nor I can do that. Nor should we involve helpless others in our country's quarrels. How matters may lie between you and Miss Grey and Herr von Muecke is a problem that only you can solve among you. I cannot give orders. I can only suggest, advise."
   Lauterbach clicked his heels. "Thank you, Herr Kapitan! And what do you suggest?"
   "I think it might be wise for you, Kapitan Lauterbach, to return to your ship and recall all hands who may be subject to mobilization. I would not be at all surprised at a morning call ordering you aboard the Emden, very possibly before daylight!"
   Lauterbach looked startled. "Do you really believe that?"
   Von Mueller nodded soberly. "I am afraid I do. In your place I would take Miss Grey back to the ship or to her hotel, or wherever she is staying, as quickly as you can, and advise her then to get away, tomorrow at the latest, to Peking or Hong Kong or Shanghai, where she will be under the protection of her own government. I am afraid that none of us have much time left in such matters,"
   Lauterbach swallowed. "Thank you, Herr Kapitan," he said. "I hadn't realized matters were so—so critical."
   "It is not what I would prefer—" von Mueller began. But he was interrupted by a hand on his arm. He turned to find the Governor, grim-faced, beside him.
   "May I talk with you for a moment, Karl?" he asked. "In my study?"
   The click of von Mueller's heels was indicative. So was his short, precise bow. It told not only of the man, but of his whole training.
   "Jawohl, Herr Baron!" he replied. As he turned away, his eve caught Lauterbach's. "Bear in mind what I have said, Herr Oberleutnant." His use of Lauterbach's reserve rank, rather than that of his regular merchant title, was significant.
   "I understand, Kapitan!" Lauterbach replied. "I will await orders."
   "I fear they will not be long coming," said von Mueller. "I ask only that you clear your decks."
   "Intuition, Kapitan?" the Governor asked as they moved away.
   "Not exactly," von Mueller answered. "You forget, sir, that I also receive dispatches from Berlin."
   "Then you know?"
   "That it is imminent."
   "That it is here!" The Governor was almost triumphant. "Russia has just issued a declaration of war against Austria. As Austria's allies we have had no choice but to declare war on Russia, and France and England, as Russia's partners, have declared war on us. The thing that we have all anticipated has finally arrived. You don't seem happy, Kapitan?"
   "I can't say that I am."
   "I can't understand that," said Meyer-Waldeck. "I thought war was your business."
   "There you are mistaken, Herr Governor," von Mueller replied seriously. "As a naval officer it is not my place to make war. It is my work to try to prevent it. Once it comes, however, it is for me to fight it as best I can. I only feel sorry for my boys."
   The Governor looked surprised.
   "Sir, you must understand that every one of my men— every living individual on board my ship—is a son to me. They are my responsibility. I am answerable for all. Anything that affects them is equally my problem."
   "Oh?" said the Governor. "So? Well! That's very commendable. I will mention it in my dispatches. But first I must remind you that there is a war on. We have no time for sentimentality!"
   "I know," von Mueller replied. "I was just thinking of Bunte, To have this happen at just this time will be hard on him. But I don't see that we have any choice. I presume I should get all hands back on board and clear for sea?"
   "Those are the orders, Karl." The Governor nodded sympathetically.
   "I was afraid of it," said von Mueller. "Well! I suppose there is nothing to do but tell Bunte that his honeymoon must be postponed!"
   "I'm afraid that's right, Karl," Meyer-Waldeck agreed.
   "I don't suppose—" von Mueller began.
   "You're his commanding officer, Karl."
   "There's not even a chance of leaving him in port until we get back?" von Mueller begged. "After all, we can navigate without one man."
   "I said those were the orders, Karl. All males of military age must mobilize. If he fails to respond, he risks all he has worked for—commission—everything. I wish an exception could be made. But—"
   Von Mueller shook his head. "I understand, sir," he said. "I can't pretend I am happy, but I am aware that neither of us has any choice. I only hope his bride understands as well!"
   "I wish you luck!" Von Meyer-Waldeck grinned wryly.
   "Well you may!" said von Mueller, and went out and back to the end of the receiving line.

   Bunte Lange stared into the smoky seas from the bridge of the Emden resentfully. A man and a woman should be allowed one brief moment together. When a couple was married, they should have at least a few hours of privacy, it seemed to him. God damn all authority!
   But whom should he damn specifically? The Kaiser? God forbid! The Chancellor? He was only doing his job. The Captain? Of course not! He had his orders. God? That was just a round robin! The Russians? The English? The French? That was it! They started it, and now here was half the world caught up in the mess. The Germans were peaceful people. Whom had they ever antagonized? None that he had ever been told. Perhaps it would all be over soon. At least a man could hope. But if the others wanted to prolong it, he supposed, they could. After all, it took two sides to make a war!
   In ordinary circumstances he would have thought of his own English and French friends in that distant corner of the world. But as matters stood, he could hardly be blamed for resenting anything that interfered with his personal life—or with hers. It was a moment in a man's own career that should be his alone. Why would he not be upset that it had been interrupted? Why would he not try to blame them?
   Through the gloom of the night and the dark, smoky fog he thought he caught a glimmer of light. It was not bright enough to identify, but there was no doubt it was a ship. Probably it was a Jap, since it seemed to be bearing generally toward Shimonoseki Strait, between the islands of Honshu and Kushu, the usual route to the major ports of eastern Japan. But under the circumstances it was his duty to investigate—and be ready. He stepped into the wheelhouse and punched the buzzer that sounded general quarters and went the crew spewing out of their hammocks to battle stations. Over the speaker he sent the terse announcement:
   "This is no drill! Repeat! This is no drill!"
   All at once he remembered that he had forgotten one all-important thing. He glanced at the helmsman, who still held the ship on her original course.
   "Full right rudder!" he commanded. "Bring her around to a heading of one fifteen degrees!"
   "One hundred fifteen degrees! Jawohl, Herr Leutnant!" replied the man automatically, and spun the wheel.
   At the same time, Lange jabbed at the engine-room signal, calling for full speed ahead, and even as he did so the buzzer from the Captain's cabin shattered the night with its shrill clatter.
   "Good Lord, forgive me!" he muttered as he jumped toward the intercom telephone. "So many things to remember at a moment like this! Bridge, Kapitan!"
   "What's going on?" came von Mueller's voice curtly.
   "I was just about to call you, Kapitan," Lange replied, forgetting the cardinal rule of no excuses. "We have just sighted a vessel bearing east by south, one hundred fifteen degrees. She appears to be trying to reach neutral waters north and east of Okinoshima toward Shimonoseki Strait. I thought it best to alter course and alert the crew."
   "Can we overtake her?" Von Mueller's tone was crisp.
   "It depends on her speed, Kapitan." Lange held his breath. "But I think we should."
   "Very good! I will be right up!" von Mueller said.
   "Jawohl, Herr Kapitan!" replied Lange smartly, and hung up with a sigh of relief. The worst was over now, at least until they came up with the stranger. Of course, it could be that he had caught a Tartar—no pun intended so far as he was concerned. The French armored cruisers Montcalm and Dupleix, and the Russian cruiser Jemtschug, all of which out-gunned the Emden, were known to be in the vicinity. At the same time, it was believed, but not known certainly, that an English squadron was on its way to Yokohama from Wei-haiwei; a cruise that would bring them into much the same course. In any case, the sighted ship could mean trouble—not that Bunte was afraid of trouble, but he did hope for one quick return to Tsingtao before matters grew too serious.
   Down below, Karl von Mueller dragged himself out of his berth reluctantly. He had been late on the bridge and it was still not yet dawn, though the early-morning darkness was beginning to mm gray. He pulled on his trousers and slipped into his coat. Thank goodness, with the high-hooked collar, it was not necessary to wear a shirt! In less than sixty seconds he was clambering up the ladder to the bridge.
   Lange saluted dutifully. "I took the liberty of running ahead of her, sir," he reported, "and forcing her back out to sea. She has still not responded to signals and laid to. Should I order a shot across her bows?"
   Von Mueller tapped the boy's arm approvingly. "Let's try that, Bunte. If she's a Russian she's a legitimate prize of war. If she's a Jap, she should heave to and show us her papers. In the first instance you will probably be the first to capture an enemy vessel in this war. In the second no blame can attach to you provided they have not reached neutral waters."
   "They've half a dozen miles to go, sir, before they can do that," the lieutenant replied.
   "Then head them and start shooting," von Mueller said. "A shot or two, close alongside, with no real damage, should make them stop and think twice. On the high seas even the English maintain that a nation at war is justified in challenging all strangers."
   The lieutenant replied by pressing the firing button.
   In immediate response the guns of the forward turret slammed. From the bridge they could hear the shells scream outward and see the white geysers of salt spray that they flung up beyond and beside the stranger's bow. The other ship's siren blasted a cloud of steam into the dawn air, followed seconds later by the frantic groan of her whistle.
   "Nicely done, Leutnant," von Mueller said. "I think we'll have no more trouble with her. Get a boat away for boarding and find out who she is. If she's neutral, we'll have to let her go, of course. But if she's what I think she is, we'll take her back to Tsingtao for adjudication. You wouldn't mind that, would you?"
   "Nein! Jawohl, Herr Kapitan!" Lange exclaimed.
   "Then hop to it!" von Mueller ordered.
   But Bunte Lange had already anticipated him and was well down the ladder.
   Karl von Mueller's guess was scarcely a long shot. In those waters Greek or Italian ships were few and far between. Americans ran north or south, but rarely through the straits. Chinese were principally junk-rigged, and most steam traffic was either Russian or Japanese. Since the Russians operated the major ferry lanes, it was a fair guess that this was one of theirs.
   The thought proved sound. The stranger was the steamer Rjasan: big, new, fast, and German-built only a few years earlier at the Schichau yards to the specifications of her Russian owners. The fact that she was fully stressed and even partially armored, that she carried as ballast under a false flooring in her holds all the weapons and munitions of war necessary to convert her to an auxiliary cruiser, more than suggested that the Russians were not as blandly guileless as they pretended to be. Since she was fast and nearly twice the size of the little Emden, she was an invaluable prize, and Karl von Mueller decided to take her in immediately to Tsingtao, where she could be libeled and condemned as quickly as possible, and added to the scant German forces in the East.
   There were no protests.
   As it happened, however, it was hardly that simple. For one thing, despite the prize crew von Mueller sent on board under Lauterbach's command, the Captain of the Rjasan was difficult. The most elementary steps, of course, were taken. The wireless was carefully rendered inoperative—not smashed, for it would be a valuable instrument in German hands later on—but all keys were removed and the power was shut off. Armed guards were placed on the bridge, in the engine room and fireroom, in the forecastle, at the lookouts, and all similar points of vantage, while armed patrols roved through the corridors and decks at odd hours so that no routine pattern could be set. Nevertheless, the task was not easy. Unless he was watched like a hawk, the Russian helmsman, under the spur of patriotism, tended to sheer off course little by little in the hope of being able to shake off the German cruiser in a sudden white squall, or under the cover of darkness, and several times the Russian engineer was caught opening his drafts to pour a thick cloud of oily black smoke into the air. Some smoke, of course, could hardly be avoided. But the Russian deliberately attempted to send up smoke signals.
   Nor was that all. During the day, the smoke and masts of several ships were sighted at the edge of the horizon. Since the vessels themselves were fortunately hull do^^^l, they did not sight the Emden, but there was no doubt that they were the formidable French fleet, led by the heavy armored cruisers Montcalm and Dupleix, with whom the Rjasan had been in wireless contact only a short time before her capture. Much as it went against the grain, von Mueller had no choice but quick and rapid retreat, circling east and south in order to give the enemy an opportunity to pass. During the night, the passengers aboard the Rjasan, a number of immensely stout Russian women, persisted in showing lights despite the strict blackout orders. Several times they were caught and ordered to stop. At last, in sheer desperation, Lauterbach had them locked in their cabins and all electric power to their quarters shut off. Even then they persisted in trying to frustrate him by lighting matches at their portholes, until at length he was obliged to order their port covers dogged down. After that, at least, there were no more lights.
   For all that, their troubles were not yet over. Toward noon next day they encountered two large Japanese passenger ships, who dipped their colors in salute, but prudently made no effort to contact any enemy vessels. A little later still, they sighted the smoke of several other ships, which they avoided, for it seemed altogether probable that these were the British squadron from Weihaiwei.
   So now the circle had come complete. The noose was tightening, and only the Japanese remained in doubt in these waters, and in point of fact, there was little doubt about them. When had they not been tied to Britain's apron strings, they had had a jealous eye for Tsingtao and would be unlikely to pass up any opportunity to pounce upon it. China, of course, counted for virtually nothing as far as the Germans were concerned. All her ports and major cities were controlled by the British, and the vessels of other nations were admitted only on a sort of sufferance. There was little doubt what sort of welcome the Emden would receive should she find it necessary to take refuge there. Not that Karl von Mueller intended trying any such thing, but it would have been comforting to know that there was at least one haven in which they might find shelter for a few hours. As mauers stood, even the neutral Dutch islands lay far to the south. However, there was no despondency aboard the lonely little cruiser as she and her prisoner slipped along within sight of the wild, rocky China coast. The night fell, and they shaped their course in the general direction of the Cha-lien-tao light at the vert tip of the Tsingrao peninsula. It was clear, though moonless, with just enough light coming from the stars to enable them to make out the black bulk of their captive and mark her phosphorescent wake. Every man aboard had complete confidence in the skill and judgment of Kapitanleutnant Heinrich Gropius, the chief navigator, andeven if they had not, a rank amateur could have conned her on such a night. They laid their course by the stars, since even the glow of the binnacle was risky, and set their pace to bring up the Laoshan Mountains with the dawn.
   Through the dark they churned steadily, and the watch below took to their hammocks with full assurance that by morning they would be back in port. Gradually the little nocturnal noises of the ship settled to the steady rhythmic hum of the engines. Kapitanleutnant Dirk Gaede relieved the bridge promptly at eight bells—midnight, and though his battle station was that of gunnery officer, everyone knew that he was just as capable as "Heinie" Gropius as a navigator. Vizesteuermann Aleyer, the quartermaster's mate, himself had the wheel, and it was told of him that he could sail through the Suez Canal on a stormy night with his eyes closed and not peel the paint off a buoy on the way. Marine Oberingenieur Ellenbroek, the chief engineer, was on duty in the engine room, and all the Schiffsvolk, including Captain von Mueller, fell asleep without a shade of worry.
   Their full confidence appeared to be entirely justified—at least until shortly after six bells of the midwatch, when all at once the wheelhouse buzzer sang out like an angry wasp. Gaede, who had been leaning on the wheelhouse window ledge, scanning the dark waters ahead and sniffing the strengthening smell of China, somewhere not too many miles to starboard, jumped and picked up the tube.
   "Bridge!" he said sharply, but at the same time keeping his voice low, for there are times when voices carry amazingly over water. 
   "Herr Kapitanleutnant," came the tinny voice over the wire "here is Feldspringer at foremast lookout. I have just viewed four bright lights running one and a half to tu-o points off the port bow between seven and nine miles distant. They are moving in the same direction as ourselves."
   "Can you see what they are?" Gaede asked.
   "No, Herr Kapitanleutnant They are still too far away."
   "Thank you, Feldspringer," said Gaede curtly. "Keep your eye on them and report to me the moment you can make them out."
   He hung up the receiver and turned away toward the row of bells that would alert all on board. He hated to do it. The Captain, the men below, had worked hard all day. The ships could be mere coasters. But they might also be British, French, or even Russian warships. The time it took him to satisfy his own curiosity might be just the interval needed for a stronger foe to become aware of their presence, and if It came to that the presence of the Rjasan would be no help!
   Reluctantly he began to punch the buzzer buttons.
   Karl von Mueller had ordered all bells muffled, long before, removing the big brass semi-circles and replacing them with wooden boxes that rattled like the warning throb of a rattlesnake's tail. The urgent sound would bring a sleeping man sitting up in an instant, but it did not carry over water like the shrill voice of a bell.
   His judgment proved sound. The buzzing of the summons seemed faint, even to Gaede on the bridge. But the interval between the warning and the slip-slap of the men's feet hurrying to their stations on deck was no more than a matter of seconds. It seemed to him that he had scarcely lifted his finger from the signal before von Mueller's voice sounded softly at his elbow.
   "What's up, Dirk?"
   As it happened, the vessels ahead proved to be only four large junks coasting southward toward Shanghai. Dirk Gaede felt miserably embarrassed, but Karl von Mueller cut short Dirk's apologies. "Stop it, Herr Gaede! You did exactly the right thing, and I would have been more than angry if you had not. Those junks might have been enemy warships. If they had been and you had hesitated to sound the alarm out of a regard for our rest, we might all now be resting at the bottom of the sea. I commend you, sir! I find no fault with your judgment, and damn it, I'll ask you not to find fault with it, either."
   They raised the mouth of the harbor and the masts of the pilot boat, outside the mine field, almost exactly at daybreak. They picked their way carefully through the tortuous channel and into the mine-free waters of the bay. Inside they were met by the very trim and very white, but very fussily efficient, government launch. As the boat bustled up, carrying a huge Imperial ensign, nearly as big as herself, the Emden hove to and an accommodation ladder was let down. A moment later a smart young military aide to the Governor came bounding. Meticulously he saluted the quarter-deck first before addressing the officer of the watch.
   "I have dispatches for Kapitan von Mueller," he announced.
   "The Captain is in his quarters, Leutnant," replied von Gropius. "The messenger will show you the way."
   As soon as they were gone, Gropius turned to the ship's telephone and reported the visitor's approach to Captain von Mueller.
   "Thank you, Gropius," came die reply. "I have been expecting him."
   When the aide arrived, von Mueller read the sheaf of papers that were handed him—the flimsy blue telegram with the urgent stamp, the far more detailed and carefully prepared orders and recommendations from the Governor, and finally the hastily scrawled note in longhand.
   "I take it that the coal and stores are ready for loading?"
   "At dockside, Herr Kapitan," the aide replied, "a crew of coolies is standing by to start work as soon as you have moored."
   Von Mueller nodded. "Then if you please, Leutnant, you will return at once to the Governor and inform him that we will dock within an hour and that I will begin immediately to carry out his orders. Once the work is under way, I will come to his office—say, in a matter of two hours."
   The aide saluted and departed.
   When he was gone, von Mueller studied the longhand note again thoughtfully. Then he folded it carefully, put it in his pocket, and reached for the telephone.
   ^ "Officer of the Deck Gropius speaking, Kapitan," came the instant response.
   "Please summon all officers to meet with me in the wardroom immediately. Have the bridge maintain bare steerage-way towards the harbor." "Zum Befehl, Herr Kapitan!"
   By the time von Mueller reached the wardroom, the rest of the ship's officers had already assembled and were waiting with an air of tense expectancy. Such orders as these could only foreshadow some serious emergency. The little room was crowded. Under his feet von Mueller could tell by the slow, throbbing pulse of the engines that the ship was only barely moving. He nodded his satisfaction to Gropius.
   "Gentlemen," he said, "I need not remind you that we are now at war with three of the most powerful antagonists in the world. Any one of their navies outnumbers our own small fleet, and Britain's—especially with her Dominions' forces—IS almost overwhelmingly superior. This does not mean, however, that we shall give up without a fight. They are not invulnerable, and I have every reason to believe that if we can hold them off for a little time, our German shipyards, which are the most efficient in the world, will come forth with the ships; our German arms manufacturers, who are acknowledged second to none, will provide the weapons, armament, and munitions needed; and the Empire itself will not lack for seamen of devotion!"
   There was a murmur of applause at diat. "However, gentlemen," von Mueller went on seriously, that IS not all. The task will not be easy. Nevertheless, gentlemen, whether we enjoy it or not, we—you and I—must accept it and carry it out to the best of our abilities — not simply for the War Lord, who is our symbol of Empire, but forthe Empire itself; and for all the people who look to us for protection in war and peace."
   There was silence in the room now, the silence of expectancy.
   "I have here, in my hand," von Mueller went on, "our most recent orders from Admiral von Spee. I cannot read them to you in full at this time, since part of them, for obvious reasons, must remain secret until we are at sea. What I can read, however, I am afraid some of you may find dismaying. Our orders are to dock as quickly as possible; to refuel, revictual, and take in such stores as we need; and to put back to sea immediately—and that means immediately. For your information, gentlemen, I expect this ship to be in readiness to sail by six o'clock this evening!"
   There was another silence, silence of a different kind; almost of consternation. Bunte Lange turned white. Von Muecke looked grim but resigned. Franz von Hohenzollern spoke up.
   "It will take time to revictual, Herr Kapitan," he said almost hopefully.
   Marine Oberingenieur Ellenbroek followed his lead. "We'll have to have more coal if it's to be a long voyage."
   Von Mueller smiled slightly with his eyes, but his mouth was a flat line. "What about ammunition, guns?" he said. "As much as we can get, sir," replied Gaede. "Torps?" demanded the Captain crisply. "We've all the fish we can carry now, Kapitan," von Witthoeft answered. "But only a few of them are armed. We'll need warheads all around for full operation."
   "All right, gentlemen," said von Mueller. "You will find everything we need all ready and waiting dockside, with coolies standing by to help load. Your duty will be to see that everything necessary is brought aboard at once. Lange, you and Schall will oversee the coaling. Von Hohenzollern, you will be 'ship's housekeeper.' I want sufficient stores for both officers' and crew's mess—and don't overlook the men's beer and grog rations! Ellenbroek, be sure that you have all spares necessary for the proper function of the engines. It may be a long time before we will be able to refit. Von Braun, see to the ship's stores, including paint and spare rigging, torpedo mats and plates for replacement of damage. Andresen, see to it that everything needed to keep the electrical system, including the wireless, in full working order is on board. Doktor Luther, I want your medical locker overstocked—over-stocked, do you understand me? We may not be able to restock for a long time,and we will have casualties."
   He paused to let the import of that remark reach them.
   "Herr Kapitan?" Bunte Lange found his tongue.
   "One moment, Leutnant!" von Mueller snapped.
   "Kapitanleutnant Gropius, you will now take the ship in as quickly as possible. The sooner we dock, the sooner we will be away!"
   Gropius saluted and started to turn away.
   "By the way," said von Mueller, halting him, "as soon as you have seen to that, will you send word to the officers' cook to report to me in my quarters?"
   Gropius looked baffled, but knew better than to question an order. "Zum Befehl, Herr Kapitan!" he replied, and disappeared.
   The rest started to follow him.
   "Just a moment, gentlemen!" von Mueller halted them, "I have not finished."
   They turned back expectantly—a little sheepishly.
   "Kapitanleutnant von Muecke," the Captain went on, "you will oversee all of this and be sure that it is carried out in every detail. For the rest of you—and for all of you—it is no secret that we are to rendezvous with the fleet. After that our movements will be subject to the orders of the Admiral. Neither you nor I can even guess at them at this moment. Leutnant von Guerard, Leutnant Lange, will you both remain here for a moment? Division officers will inform the men. There will be no shore liberty beyond the gates of the dockyard. Dismissed!"
   When the others were gone, von Mueller glanced at von Guerard. "Anton," he said, "I understand that the Rjasan has not yet been passed through the nets."
   "No, Herr Kapitan!" von Guerard replied.
   "Very well," said von Mueller. "When she does come in, she has her mooring orders. I want you to see to it that Oberleutnant Lauterbach is apprised of the situation. His orders are to take his prize crew over to the Staatssekrettar Kratke as soon as he has surrendered the Rjasan to the local authorities, and to assume command of the Kratke for the time being. She will accompany us to the fleet rendezvous, and we will probably coal from her, after which Oberleutnant Lauterbach will come back aboard the Emden and the Kratke will be converted to an auxiliary cruiser for convoy duty. Please make that clear to him. She must be ready to sail with us by five o'clock this afternoon."
   "Jawohl, Herr Kapitan," said von Guerard obediently.
   "You may also inform the commanders of the Elsbeth, the Prinz Eitel Friedrich, Markomannia, Prinz Ludwig, Speervald, and Captrafalgar that they must be ready to sail at the same time—fully loaded. And, Anton," added von Mueller, "you must do all this by messenger. Do you understand? We can risk no wireless broadcast."
   "Jawohl, Herr Kapitan," repeated von Guerard.
   When he was gone, the Captain turned to Bunte Lange. "I'm sorry, Leutnant Lange," he said. "I'm afraid this is not very happy news for you."
   "You made it plain, Herr Kapitan," Lange replied, "that we could not expect the best at this time."
   "I'm afraid it's worse than that, Bunte," von Mueller said.
   "Worse?" Lange's eyes were suddenly startled.
   "I'm afraid your bird has flown, Bunte," he said. "Her father sent her and her mother to Shanghai by rail, with orders to clear from there as quickly as possible for Germany."
   He passed over the handwritten note that had come with the dispatches. Lange opened it and read it through carefully; once in disbelief, the second time desperation.
   "Kapitan—" he began.
   "Gently, Leutnant!" von Mueller interrupted. "You must understand that in one way or another each one of us—down to the lowest decks—must face as hard a problem. Maybe someone down there has an even harder one than you. But if we have a problem, Bunte, so does everyone in the Empire. The very fact that we are Germans—"
   "But, sir! But, sir," Lange protested, "we—she is going to have a baby."
   "That doesn't help!" said von Mueller.
   Lange stiffened. "I—It's not for myself, Herr Kapitan," he said. "As you have said, I have given my oath and will stand by it. But must she—"
   Von Mueller looked sympathetic. "Bunte," he said, "we are all subjects of the Empire. Isn't she? Aren't you? We have sworn an oath, Bunte. But wasn't she born to it?"
   "You don't understand, Herr Kapitan!" said Lange involuntarily.
   "Don't I?" retorted von Mueller sharply. "I understand that she has her ideal, as you also have yours. If you can mold them into conformity, well and good. But, Leutnant Lange, I would also remind you that you have your duty, and she has hers. If they could be combined, that would be well and good, and we would all wish you happiness. But since they cannot, we must take the bitter with the sweet!"
   "Sir, but was it necessary for her to be sent away?" Lange blurted.
   There was a pause.
   "Bunte," von Mueller said slowly, "I'm sorry. But she is no longer here. Maybe something will turn up later. But we cannot count on it. In any case—" ''We 'play the game'!" said Bunte.
   "The 'game,' Bunte?" von Mueller retorted. "I'm afraid it will be more than a 'game.' Of course, if you prefer, I could have you transferred to one of the local minesweepers or torpedo patrols. She might be turned back—or you might be able to follow her into neutral territory."
   Lange swallowed, but scarcely hesitated. "Thank you, Herr Kapitan," he replied. "My place is here, where I have been assigned, on board the Emden. I would not desert."
   "I understand, Bunte." Von Mueller smiled gently. "I did not think you would run. Perhaps soon, sometime, we may be able to cross her path. If we do, I may send you in that direction. In the meantime, I know, you will do your best." "Thank you, sir," said Bunte.
   "And remember, Leutnant Lange," von Mueller added, "today the coal. I will be ashore for a while. If I hear anything, I will let you know."
   They slid into the coaling wharf, at the Imperial dockyard, before the sun began to get warm, and cast ashore their mooring lines. Even before the accommodation ladders were down, the gangways were up for the coolie crews, and the coal and supplies began flowing on board. Over at mole number one the Kaiserin Elizabeth still lay, where they had left her. Von Mueller reflected that she would be about as much defensive use as an Irish wherry. But at least she was out of his jurisdiction. He saw to it that everything aboard was going smoothly, and started for shore.
   Before he went down the gangway, he drew Helmuth von Aluecke aside. "Let me see what I can find out, Helmuth," he said. "I'll let you know."
   "Very well, Herr Kapitan."
   Von Mueller smiled thinly. If that was the way it was to be, there was nothing he could do about it. Did none of them think he had any feelings in the matter?
   At Government House, von Meyer-Waldeck was scarcely more receptive. "You were a long time getting in," he growled, "and here I have been left with all the details. Where were you?"
   Von Mueller frowned. "Hardly a pleasure cruise, Herr Hauptmann," he-replied. "I had my orders, and I did bring back a fat prize. She can replace the old Kormoran. She's newer and faster, and with her plates and the guns she carries in her hold, plus those on the old Kormoran she will be a far more effective guard."
   "So?" said von Meyer-Waldeck, only slightly mollified.
   "So at least we are not leaving you entirely defenseless," von Mueller retorted. "Besides, we are leaving you the Kaiserin Elizabeth.
   "Pah!" snapped the Governor, and von Mueller was curiously pleased.
   There was a moment's silence.
   "But we cannot quarrel," von Mueller said finally. "Johannes, we have more important matters to think about. Shall we get down to business?"
   They went through the work mechanically but thoroughly. When they had done, von Mueller leaned back in his chair.
   "All right, Johannes," he said. "We'll sail tonight. But why did you have to send Use away so hastily? Didn't you know how they would feel?"
   "Oh, that, Karl!" cried the Governor. "For God's sake, why let it bother you? If you must know, Viktoria thought it would be best for her and the child."
   "Didn't you guess that she was pregnant?" von Mueller demanded.
   The Governor stared at him, aghast. "Why didn't someone tell me?
   "It was no one's business but theirs, Johannes," von Mueller replied. "And it was not ours to pry. If she were here now. It would not be too late. But now she is gone—"
   "Good God! What am I to do?" the Governor cried.
   That's for you to say, Johannes," von Mueller replied. I m sure I have not the answer. At least they are married now."
   "Can't you put in at Shanghai?" said the Governor desperately.
   "Don't be a fool, Johannes!"
   "Then what?" the Governor begeed.
   "What?" retorted von Mueller."You know my orders, Johannes, and you know I cannot deviate from them—not for the sake of one man, or for all."
   "You might touch South America—or Manila—" the Governor began.
   "Or even reach Germany," said von Mueller. "No Johannes, this speculation is idle, as you know it is. She is your girl, who must endure the hardships of war, as he is my boy—at least my responsibility—who must obey orders. Will you do something for them?"
   "Is there anything I can do for them?" cried the Governor eagerly.
   "Write to her," said von Mueller. "Write to her, but not to Viktoria. Tell her that he loves her dearly and would crive his life to be at her side—" He brightened abruptly "I tell you, Johannes! It may be an idea! Tell them to take an American ship to Hawaii, en route to Germany. It may be that one of the fleet will put in there. If I hear that one will, I'll try to put him aboard."
   Von Meyer-Waldeck's face brightened. "Will you Karl?" he cried. "How can I thank you?""
   "Don't thank me yet," retorted von Mueller. "We don't even know that it will be possible. But we can try."
   Oddly, he left Government House with a somewhat lighter heart.
   It was only when he stepped into the official car that was waiting for him that he remembered. He was sure that he had told Gropius to tell Herman Schultz to come to his quarters. But in the press of other things he had forgotten and come ashore before the man could get there. Perhaps he would find him at home. He gave the address, out on Kiao-chow Road, to the chauffeur, who looked startled. But the Captain was too preoccupied to offer any explanation. When they drew up in front of the small bungalow, he told the driver to wait.
   He went up the flower-lined path to the veranda and knocked. A large, broadly beaming woman opened the door, and at sight of him her mouth fell open.
   "Ach! Herr Kapitan!" was all she could say.
   In the shadows of the room behind her von Mueller could see Herman Schultz with his coat and shoes off and his feet comfortably raised on a stool.
   At sight of the Captain the big man lumbered to his feet and made an awkward attempt at a salute. "I came to your quarters, as Herr Gropius said, but you were not there."
   "Sorry, Herman," von Mueller replied. "No excuse! But maybe it's better this way."
   The big cook looked blank, "You wanted to see me, sir?" he asked.
   Von Mueller smiled slightly. "Would I be here now, Herman, if I did not?" he asked. "And now that I am here, Hilde, perhaps it is as well that we are all three together."
   "There is trouble, Kapitan? " Herman looked worried.
   "War, Herman," replied von Mueller.
   "War? And what has this to do with me?"
   "Herman, you are the only civilian employed aboard the Emden. You are the only one, apart from the Chinese washermen below, free to leave as you will. Within a few hours we will be sailing—where, I cannot say; to return—when, I don't know. If you would rather not go—"
   Herman Schultz's face fell. "You are discharging me, sir," he demanded.
   Von Mueller smiled widely for the first time in days. "Not at all, Herman!" he replied. "I am simply saying that you alone, of all the ship's people, may choose."'
   "But what about my wife—here? What about our little house.'
   "I'm afraid we cannot move the house," replied von Mueller, "but we might be able to arrange to get Hilde to Shanghai."
   "I would stay here!" said Hilde Schultz belligerently.
   The two men exchanged glances.
   "I should be with you, Kapitan," said Schultz. "I am not qualified for any other service. And where would my boys be without me?"
   "We'd all be at sea, Herman," yon Mueller grinned. "But you must not feel that you must come."
   Herman examined the palms of his hands carefully. "I—I think I should explain, Kapitan," he said at length. "You see this is a time when all of us are called to do what we can If I go to the Army - they will say, 'You have flat feet; you cannot carry a mousetrap two hundred yards!' 'But,' I would say, 'what is that to me? I am a cook.' 'A cook, ha-ha!' they would laugh. We have ten thousand cooks, all of them trained in the coke ovens of the Ruhr!' So they would reject me. Then I would go to the Navy. 'What haye you been doing?' they would say. 'I have been cook of the officers' mess on the Emden' I would tell them. 'Then we may use you in the stokehold,' they would reply. And, Kapitan, I like better where I am. I want to go with you—please!"
   "£?'^ ^ ^''""'^ ''^'^ ^^^^ '^o ^^'■' here!" Hilde Schultz put in. "Please, Herr Kapitan, will you think about it?"
   Von Mueller turned to her and bowed. "Madame," he replied, "I'm afraid I will have no time to think about it. We must be ready to sail by five o'clock this afternoon. If Herman IS on board, we will all be most happy. If he is not, we will all understand."
   Herman looked surprised. "You mean I may have time to decide.'" he cried.
   "But of course, Herman!" von Mueller assured him. He nodded again to Hilde. "Please forgive the intrusion, Frau Schultz, I would not have come if I had not missed seeing Herman on board. Whatever you decide, be sure that the best wishes and love of all in the Emden go with you."
   He climbed a little wearily back into his car. So long as he had taken the time to see Herman, he thought, he might as well try to see the others. The least he could do would be to carry back some word to those who could not get ashore.
   He waited some time outside von Braun's house before the frowzy middle-aged woman in a velvet gown with a pink boa collar opened the door. At the sight of him her face dropped.
   "Kapitan von Mueller!" she exclaimed. "I didn't know— Didn't Ludwig—isn't he—didn't he tell you I'm not well?"
   Karl von Mueller looked at her coldly. Even without entering the room he could see the three empty brandy bottles by the couch.
   "I am sorry, Frau von Braun"—von Mueller kept his thoughts to himself—"but your husband will not be able to come ashore. We are under strict orders, and will be sailing soon. If you feel that you must see him, I suggest that you come to the dockyard about four this afternoon. The yard-master will give you the necessary pass if you mention my name."
   He started to back out.
   "But he must!" she cried. "He must come to see me! He knows what this sun does to my complexion. If I don't get out of here, what is to become of me?"
   Von Mueller grasped the doorknob firmly. "As to that, madame," he said coldly, "I suggest you consult the Governor."
   He slammed the door angrily and fled. Poor von Braun! As for the Governor, in his opinion, the man had it coming to him, and he only hoped it did!
   But he was trained in a school of thoroughness. He drove next to the Prinz Heinrich Hotel. In the lobby he hesitated amid the sea of reserve uniforms, and then decided that Trudi Voss ranked first, as the wife of one of his officers. Since he knew where the suite was, he did not stop to be announced.
   It was scarcely necessary. The door stood open, and as he entered he found the Australian girl doing some sort of an unnamed Maori dance in the flimsiest of negligees before an admiring group of younger officers from the Kaiserin Elizabeth.
   No one saw him enter.
   "Frau Voss!" he barked.
   The Austrian officers fell back before the authority in his voice, but Trudi Voss scarcely hesitated in her undulations.
   "Why, Captain Miller!" she exclaimed—she always got his name wrong. "I didn't know the ship was back! How ducky of you to be the first here. Probably you came to warn me!"
   Von Mueller gulped, more in fury than embarrassment. "I came," he said to them all, "to warn everyone here that this is no opera bouffe war. Gentlemen—and I use the word only because I must—unless you are all back on board your ship within twenty minutes I, personally, will demand that your commanding officer confine you to quarters and call for a general court-martial!"
   One of the Austrians, a Subleutnant, drew himself up defiantly and stared at von Mueller through a monocle. "What!" he exclaimed. "A German giving orders to Austrian officers? "
   Von Mueller impaled him with a baleful ice-blue glare. "Exactly, young man! The senior officer present in this port is giving orders to a pack of understrappers who should know better. My name is von Mueller, and I command in these waters until I am out of them. If any of you care to question that, I will be happy to call your own Captain."
   The Austrian sniffed, but left the room with the others. Trudi Voss literally flung herself upon the Captain.
   "Oh, Von!" she cried. All German officers to her were "Von." "Just to think of you coming up here first to warn me! Come on, let's have a champagne."
   "Thank you, Frau Voss," replied von Mueller, disentangling himself with difficulty. "I must get back to the ship. I'm sorry to interrupt your party, but I wondered if you had a message—or if you would like to see your husband before he sails?"
   "Sails?" she asked without the least change of expression. "Where's he sailing?"
   "I'm afraid that's it, Frau Voss. We came in only this morning. We'll be away as soon as possible—"
   "Away? And what's to become of me?" she cried.
   "I'm sorry" He tried to smile, but the expression came stiff to his face. "That's hardly for me to say. I have my own hands full—"
   "I bet you do, duck!"
   "—with the ship," he finished.
   "Awr!" she said reprovingly.
   "As I say," he went on, ignoring her look, "why not come down this afternoon? We'll be having visitors between two and four. I'll arrange for you to see Rudi then, and you can settle things."
   "Ah, him!" she snorted. "He'll be too busy today, and you'll be back."
   "Sorry—I must return to the ship," replied von Mueller resignedly. "We'll see you later, I hope." He shut the door firmly behind him.
   Downstairs he asked at the desk if Miss Caroline Grey was still there. The clerk, a subaltern of police reserves, gave him an odd look. "Why, yes, sir," he said.
   "Call her room and ask her if she will come down, please," said the Captain, feeling uneasy. "Tell her it's Kapitan von Mueller, of the Emden."
   "Yes, Captain," the young man answered. But it was clear that he was suspicious.
   When Caroline Grey came down, looking quite summery and unperturbed, von Mueller could not help admiring her himself. But he insisted on standing by the desk while he talked to her, and signaled the young clerk to stand near.
   It was not that he mistrusted her, but he was duty-bound to make sure that his own position was not misinterpreted.
   "Captain von Mueller!" she exclaimed as she came up. "When did you get in?"
   "I'm afraid that's a secret, Miss Grey," he replied.
   "Will you be here long?" she demanded.
   "That's a secret, too."
   "Everything's a secret!"
   "Just about," he assured her, "especially since you are— well, officially—an enemy. One thing I can tell you, though."
   "What is that?" she asked.
   "All of your friends are well," he replied. "Now you tell me something. What arrangements have you made to leave Tsingtao?"
   The clerk gaped.
   "Why—none," she replied.
   "None? My dear girl! Don't you read the news?"
   "But—"
   "But of course we don't make war on women, Miss Grey," said von Mueller. "At the same time, we cannot allow alien women, especially enemy alien women, to remain indefinitely among us. Now, something must be done. Suppose I send word of your plight to the Governor—through this gentleman here? I'm sure he will arrange to put you on a train for Shanghai or Peking and give you a pass through the lines. No doubt when this is over—if we're all still alive—we'll get together again."
   "Thank you, Captain," she said. "I'll go to see the Governor this afternoon."
   "I think you should," he replied. "Good day, Fraulein."
   When she was gone, he turned and scribbled a quick note on the hotel stationery the clerk provided:

   This will present Miss Caroline Grey. She has been stranded here as a tourist, and I am convinced has no espionage functions. If her rail passage to Shanghai or Peking can be facilitated, any such risk will be obviated. The sights she has seen are only such as have been available to any tourist. Future risk will be eliminated if she is permitted to pass on to neutral territory. Any courtesy shown to her will be a courtesy to me.
   Karl von Mueller, Kapitan, HIMS Emden

   He showed the message to the clerk, then sealed it and addressed it to the Governor.
   He went back to the dockyard, to find the place a sort of ant-infested hive of dog-trotting coolies; a shambles of swiftly diminishing heaps of ship's gear, coal, food, drink, even bundles of signal flags, and a dozen books of signal codes for all nations, each one, of course, including the International Code.
   "All's well, and the work is going quickly," the O.D. reported.
   "Thank you, von Levetzow," said von Mueller automatically, returning the young man's salute. "I will be in my cabin. Please report to me any irregularities in the routine. And, Hans," he added, "I have a feeling that Herman Schultz will be coming aboard soon. When he docs, I wish to be notified. But don't say anything to anyone until—and unless —he does turn up."
   "You think he might not, Herr Kapitan?" Von Levetzow's face fell.
   "I think he will," von Mueller replied, "but I could be wrong."
   In his cabin von Mueller punched his bell viciously, and when Vogel appeared said, "Fetch me a double brandy, with ice and soda."
   At the steward's startled expression he tapped his desk sharply. "You heard me, Vogel! After such a morning as this has been, even a bachelor needs something!"
   The rest of the day seemed full of rumbling winches and pattering coolies' feet; the rhythmic rattle of coal baskets emptied into the hold; the chatter of the ammunition hoists taking down shells and bagged powder to the magazines. As he listened he wondered if all this was really happening to him—to them—to his ship, in this modern day and age, midsummer 1914!
   He wondered, too, if his impromptu swing around town had had any effect. The answer came at visiting time, when the first to appear, astoundingly, was Frau Voss with a brace of handsome Austrians on each arm. There was no question that they were dashing, and there was no question of their intent. Von Mueller was surprised by their taste, and made no secret of it. Curiously enough, it was Rudi Voss himself who presented them, as much as to say, "See how popular my Trudi is everywhere? Yet she is mine!"
   Yours! von Mueller could not help thinking as beaming Rudi presented them. Ah, Rudi, perhaps this damned war will be a good thing for you, at least. It may let you prove your manhood!
   "Leutnant Doppler, of the Kaiserin, Herr Kapitan," Voss said, beaming.
   Karl von Mueller recognized the insolent young man he had encountered in the Voss apartment ashore. "I have met Leutnant Doppler," he said without offering his hand.
   "Oh—oh, yes, Herr Kapitan," Rudi stumbled. "And here is Leutnant Rennet, and Subleutnant Kraus, of the same ship."
   All three had been at the Voss apartment, and all three looked more than a little guilty. It was clear to von Mueller that Rudi knew nothing of this. The Captain clasped his hands behind him. "I believe we have met," he said coldly.
   Rudi Voss looked a little crestfallen. "But—but, sir," he protested, "my wife brought them on board!"
   Von Mueller nodded to his lieutenant, burning to tell him what was happening, yet knowing what was coming and unable to take sides in a purely personal matter. Perhaps it would be better for Rudi to be away at sea and be unaware of what might be happening ashore.
   "I'm sure she did, Voss," he said, since he must say something. And to the Austrians: "Gentlemen! We are allies. I hope you can fight as well as you can—well! Your courage will be needed."
   The Austrians looked startled, and Karl von Mueller had at least a small feeling of satisfaction. "Now if you will excuse me, gentlemen," he said, "there's a good deal of ship's business to attend."
   He started to turn away, but at that moment Alexandra von Braun came up the gangway. He saw her with a sinking heart and wished that he could avoid her. But he had to greet her.
   "Oh, Karl!" she whimpered. "I must see Ludwig! He can't just leave me here all alone, in my condition. I—I—"
   Von Mueller patted her hand with grim patience. "Now, now, Alex!" he tried to say soothingly. "Everything is going to be all right. Ludwig will arrange everything. Just be sure to take his advice. Wait, now. I'll send for him."
   He turned toward the officer of the deck. "I know I assigned him to something," he half whispered to himself, "but I can't keep it all in my head. Where the devil is he?"
   Von Levetzow had difficulty keeping a straight face. "Forrard, I think, Kapitan!"
   "Well, for God's sake call him back and let someone else take his post till he solves this problem! Be sure and let him know that I will give him half an hour to take care of it. After that I'll put a bosun's mate on for him, and he will do the duty of his replacement! The same holds true for anyone else who delays the sailing today. Is that clear, von Levetzow?"
   "Zum Befehl, Herr Kapitan!" replied von Levetzow, startled.
   "And ask Kapitanleutnant von Muecke and Leutnant Lange to come to my quarters at once." Von Mueller left the deck.
   When they came into his office quarters, Karl von Mueller was a little embarrassed.
   "Sit down, please, gentlemen," he said. "We have little time."
   They sat, not exactly sure what was coming.
   For a moment the Captain looked grim. Then he glanced at Bunte with a hint of a smile.
   "Leutnant Lange," he said, "I gave you some pretty hard news before I went ashore. I'm afraid I have returned with little better, though it may be some comfort to you to know that the young lady left as unwillingly as you could wish."
   "Thank you, Herr Kapitan," Bunte murmured.
   "That's not all," von Mueller continued. "The Governor felt it best, under the circumstances, to get Use and her mother away to some safer place than Tsingtao. Accordingly, he sent them out by rail to Shanghai. So what is to be done? Naturally, we could not put in there even if we were not under orders to steam in an entirely different direction. Neutral as it is, that port is virtually a British stronghold. If we ventured into that trap, the exit would be instantly blocked by at least four English cruisers, and there we would sit. They would like nothing better!"
   "I understand, Kapitan," said Bunte unhappily.
   "However," von Mueller went on, "there are some thing's we can do."
   Bunte looked up quickly, his expression changing swiftly from a look of deep despair to a smile of hope. "What is that?" he cried.
   "First," von Mueller replied, "I asked—perhaps insisted would be a better word—the Governor to write to his daughter, not her mother, and explain his understanding of the situation."
   "God bless you for that, Kapitan!" the boy exclaimed.
   "I suggest that you knock off work now and write to her yourself," the Captain added. "If you can let me have the letter within an hour, I can include it in my final dispatches to the Governor with a special request that he forward it to her for you."
   "Thank you, Kapitan! I will see to it immediately!"
   When he was gone, von Mueller turned to von Muecke. *T talked with her, Helmuth," he said simply.
   For a moment the exec was startled out of his usual imperturbability. "She's well? She's safe?" he demanded eagerly.
   Von Mueller smiled sympathetically. "You've no reason to believe otherwise, Helmuth," he said. "And as a matter of fact, she is perfectly well."
   "Did she—" von Muecke began, then caught himself up short. "I'm sorry, Karl! I should be better able to control myself than a wet Subleutnant."
   Von Mueller laughed outright. "In your state, Helmuth, anything is understandable. It needs no apology. Yes. Of course she asked about you, and I gave her the same reassurance that I have given you. Naturally, it was impossible to let her come here. Nor is it possible to give you the time necessary to go and see her."
   "I understand that, Karl," said von Muecke seriously. "There's still a hell of a lot of work to be done here."
   "Exactly! I'm glad you understand. So I gave her the advice that I thought you would want me to give—"
   "Which was?"
   "To put it simply, 'Get out of Tsingtao.' I told her this was not a safe place for her, as things are now, and suggested that she get away to Shanghai or Peking. To help her cross die lines, I gave her a note to the Governor, explaining her situation and suggesting that he give her such passes as she might need."
   Von Muecke sighed heavily. "Thanks, Karl," he said. "That's a relief."
   "In parring," von Mueller went on, "I suggested that after this is over we must all try to get together."
   "We will, Karl!" Von Muecke laughed. "I guarantee it! We will!"
   "Don't let your exuberance carry you away, Helmuth," the Captain warned. "Remember, there's still a war to be fought, and God alone knows how long that will take, when it's over—if we all live through it, yes—we'll meet. Until then, though, there's work to do!"

   II
   THE LITTLE CLOUD
   August 1914

   "Behold, there ariseth a little cloud out of the sea . . ."
   1 Kings, 18:44

   The shrill, insistent clangor of the telephone on the Captain's desk was timed perfectly. Von Muecke rose and departed. Von Mueller picked up the instrument and replied, "Kapitan von Mueller!"
   "Officer of the deck here, Herr Kapitan," came the response. "You asked to be notified when Herman Schultz came aboard. He is arriving now, with his suitcase and his wife—and a cat."
   "A what?" von Mueller exploded.
   "Exactly, sir—a cat!"
   "God in heaven!" von Mueller exclaimed. "I'll be right up!"
   It was true enough, he discovered when he reached the quarterdeck. At the head of the gangway stood the stalwart Herman, dressed in his best Sunday suit—a shiny black serge to which he clung obstinately, despite the fact that comfortable and well-tailored linen suits could be had for a song along the China coast. On his head was a high-crowned black bowler, which looked ridiculously small against his curly blond hair and his immense blond mustachios. In one hand he held a bulging suitcase, obviously packed for any emergency, while under his other arm he carried a large tawny tabby cat. Squarely at his elbow stood stocky Hildegarde, and apparently they had been having some words with the officer of the deck, for both their faces were red and belligerent.
   "You have decided to come with us, Herman?" von Mueller greeted him.
   "Ja, Herr Kapitan," the big cook responded dubiously. "But on one condition only."
   Von Mueller raised his eyebrows slightly, amused rather than irritated. It was unusual, to say the least, for a ship's cook to be making terms to the ship's Captain, but in the circumstances much could be overlooked.
   "Conditions, Herman?" he demanded. "What are they?" Herman's jaw set stubbornly. "That my Tabitha cat comes along with, Kapitan!"
   Von Mueller looked thoughtful, careful to show neither outrage nor amusement. "Well, I don't know, Herman," he replied seriously. "Are you sure you want her here? Do you think a fighting ship, like this, is quite a fit place for a cat in time of war?"
   "She is good kitty, Kapitan," Herman pleaded. "She will not get in the way. She will live well on the scraps, and she will be a—something to keep me reminded of home and Hilde."
   Von Mueller glanced at him quickly. That last, it seemed to him, made more sense than anything else. It accounted for the man's stubborn reluctance to leave the animal behind. To Herman the cat was a link with all that he was leaving. To the Captain it hardly seemed too great a price to pay for the undoubted benefits of the man's own presence aboard.
   "Very well, Herman," he said. "Since you feel so strongly about it, bring her along. The ship has no other mascot. She might well become just such a pet to the rest of us. I warn you, however. You must take care of her yourself, and you must particularly keep her out of the way of the ship's operation. Don't let her get underfoot—especially when action stations are called. You understand that?"
   Herman threw a triumphant look at the officer of the deck. "I understand it. In the galley will be her action station!"
   "Good!" said von Mueller. "Then welcome aboard, Herman. I speak for every officer in the mess when I say that we are touched as well as honored to have you with us. You know where your quarters are. Take your gear down and get settled in. Better lock Tabby in for the time being—"
   "On her feet, Herman, put butter," Hilde interrupted. "She will not wander."
   Von Mueller smiled at her. "I don't think she'll wander far once we've put to sea, Frau Schultz. When you've done that, Herman, to the galley. All the officers have been working hard and undoubtedly have mighty appetites. Our orders are for an early sailing, and I want to get everyone fed before we cast off, for there will be plenty of work for all for several hours after we get under way."
   "Zum Befehl, Herr Kapitan!" Herman replied smartly, and von Mueller chuckled. The man might be a civilian technically, but he took his navy duties seriously.
   As is usually the way whenever there is important work to be done, there was hardly enough time to complete it. Even with each man concentrating on his own specified sphere, the minutes ticked by too rapidly. To Karl von Mueller, whose primary task was that of completing final administrative details, twelve hours seemed scarcely sufficient to carry out all his various duties ashore and afloat. A number of ships were to accompany the Emden—the large collier Elsbeth and the former liners Staatssekretar Kratke and Markomannia, all three of which had been converted to combination coal carriers and supply ships; the big, fast Nordeutscher Lloyd liner Prinz Eitel Friedrich, which had been turned into an auxiliary cruiser; and several other smaller colliers. As senior officer present von Mueller had to make sure of their readiness for sea and relay their specific sailing orders to them. Since the former first officer of the Kratke seemed unsure of himself, von Mueller ordered Lauterbach to resume command of that ship as far as therendezvous, where it would be for the Admiral to decide whether or not to replace him.
   At least, he thought, a little wryly, this bore on him only as a friend, and he caught himself speculating on how he might feel in Lange's or von Muecke's place.
   Below deck Helmuth himself was struggling over his letter.
   "Darling," he began, and crossed it out as too presumptuous under the circumstances.
   "My dear Miss Grey," he tried next, and slashed that off as too pompous.
   "Dear Caroline," he tried next, and crossed that out for "Caroline, Dear,"
   From there he was able to go on:

   Captain von Mueller tells me that you are leaving soon for neutral territory and the company of your own people. Of course, neither one of us knows what the future holds, or how long this will last, or whether either one of us will live to see the end of it. We can only hope, my dear, that it will not last too long, that we will survive, and that when it is all over we will join hands again. God go with you and protect you, Caroline.

   He studied it when he was finished. It seemed to him that it did not say anything near what he wanted to tell her. Yet as they were placed he could hardly say more. At length the awareness of time nudged him. He folded the flap of the envelope in, leaving it open for the Captain to censor if he felt it necessary and passed it on to von Mueller, who smiled understandingly.
   "I'll try to see that she gets it, Helmuth," he promised.
   In a like vein the hour that the Captain had allowed scarcely seemed enough to Bunte Lange. There was so much to say, and so little time to say it! He wrote and wrote, using official memo pads when he could no longer find any long yellow sheets, and yet he could not seem to come to an end. "I love you, Use," was the gist of his message, "and I will come to you as soon as my duty permits." But no matter how many different ways he said it, he could never quite seem to express it in just the right way. He did not tear up what he had written, but simply kept adding to it, until the ship's clock on the bulkhead struck out the bells that told him his hour was up. He closed his message hurriedly and sealed it in a ship's envelope. What he had said was for her eyes alone.
   Karl von Mueller nodded seriously as he accepted the bulky packet. "We'll see that she gets it, Bunte," he promised.
   At 5 P.M. shore time—two bells of the first dog watch—the ship's gongs rang, signaling supper for the watch below; also that it was time for the coaling crews and other roustabouts to go ashore. Nine hundred fifty tons of fresh coal had brought the Emden's bunkers back to bulging, and the victualers and chandlers had had to stack many provisions and supplies which could not be stored away immediately in the passageways, beside the doors to their appropriate lockers. The magazines were full. In the dispensary the Stabsarzt Doktor Luther wondered where he was going to stow all the bandages and medicines and antiseptics that had been ordered on board for him. If the engineers alone were not fully satisfied, it was only because they never were.
   The coolie crews shuffled ashore, taunted by the three Chinese washermen. "Makee hoovy-boom!" the washermen jeered. "Now we go makee hoovy-boom! You stay all along home, makee bang-bang with ficlackah!"
   The sailors nearby laughed loudly. Von Muecke wondered. Would they shout so bravely when the time really came to "makee hoovy-boom?"
   But there were still notices on the several bulletin boards:
   Any man who wants to send messages ashore should do so now. We have no way of knowing when we may have another chance. The mail detail will stand by the main gangway until four bells, when all letters will be passed ashore. After that there will be no further communication.
   Around the docks, along the mole, and all through the inner anchorage, one by one the various vessels that were to accompany the Emden cast off or weighed anchor and stood down to the lower roadstead. Promptly at four bells of the evening watch, 6 p.m., von Muecke reported the ship all clear and ready for sailing. Marine Ingenieur Ellenbroek re-f&gt;orted full steam up and the engine-room crew standing by. Temporary and auxiliary gangways, used by the different loading crews, had been swung ashore, and all save a single mooring line at the bow and another astern cast off.
   Karl von Mueller received von Muecke's report on the bridge, where he was pacing restlessly. His own final dispatches had gone ashore some time since, and already the special messenger had returned with the pouch from Government House that contained final orders from the fleet, not to be opened until they were at sea.
   "Thank you, KapitanleumantI" he acknowledged. "You may cast oft."
   "Jawohl, Herr Kapitan!" said von Muecke correctly.
   "As soon as we are clear," von Mueller went on, "I want the band mustered on the fo'c'sle and all hands to man the rails."
   "Zum Befehl, Kapitan!" von Muecke replied. Yet he must have sounded questioning. It was unlike von Mueller to make much of a sailing. Von Mueller himself must have felt that the order needed some explanation. He nodded toward the dock.
   "We have already gathered a number of well-wishers, Helmuth."
   Von Muecke glanced downward from the wing of the bridge. He had not noticed before, but a crowd was beginning to assemble at dockside. Among the upturned faces it was possible to recognize only a few, but Hildegarde Shultz was prominent in the foreground. He hoped—though he looked and could not find her—that Caroline Grey was there, too.
   The rest? The overwhelming rest? They were far too many for him to have had even a nodding acquaintance with. There were some wives, perhaps. More likely there were "friends," mistresses, in the upper brackets, and von Muecke smiled a little wryly to think how little he knew of some of his messmates' shore habits. For the rest, they were probably mostly goodhearted whores from Kuangsu Road, hard but sentimental by the very nature of their trade; ordinarily easy-come, easy-go girls, but now that war was with them as fiercely possessive of "their men" as any thoroughly wed woman—and probably as much to be missed!
   There were a few men's faces scattered here and there— some on duty of course, but more who were clearly unconcerned with operations; friends, for the most part, from the Marineverein, and pinochle partners from the various clubs along the waterfront; and more than likely a good turnout of creditors who, now that it came down to the last minute, were reluctant to step forward and claim their bills!
   "That's not all, Helmuth," said the Captain. He touched his arm and pointed over across the harbor, toward the long arm of the mole. "Look there."
   In the light of the late sun von Muecke could see many people and the flash of reflected light on metal, but at that distance it was impossible to tell exactly what was going on with the naked eye. He lifted his glasses, and the scene came into focus: the massed bands of the garrisons—those from the forts on the heights encircling the city as well as those from the town itself—the long gray-clad lines of the regiments on duty, in brass-spiked, black leather helmets, black boots designed for the goose step, the bayonets fixed and gleaming.
   "We can't ignore it, can we, Helmuth?" von Mueller demanded.
   "I'm afraid not, Karl," replied von Muecke tautly, and went off to attend this new duty.
   At the sound of the ship's bell, an hour later, the Emden's siren set the echoes dancing in the hills. At the same rime, the bosun's pipes twittered in the 'tween decks, and crew came tumbling out to their review stations on the foredeck. As they formed ranks, the band, led by Uberhoboistenmaat Wecke, filed primly between them to the fo'c'sle, where the playing would not interfere with operations.
   The bosun's pipes signaled for the raising of the ladder. The lines tautened, and the well-oiled blocks offered no protest as the steps lifted. Von Hohenzollern, on duty at the gangway, looked up to where the Captain stood waiting on the wing of the bridge and saluted in signal that they were all clear at the gangway.
   Von Mueller acknowledged, then spoke into the transmitter. "Cast off aft! Cast off forrard!"
   "Cast off aft, Herr Kapitan!" came the response from the stem.
   It took a few seconds longer in the bows. Uberhoboistenmaat Wecke rapped on the cover of the nearby winch with his baton, signaling the musicians to get ready. Almost as if the signal had been intended for the machine, it began to chatter, dragging in the bow cable.
   "Cast off forrard, Herr Kapitan!" reported von Braun.
   As the lines snaked up, a sort of sighing, sobbing sound went up from the dock. At the same time, the cymbals clashed and the brasses broke abruptly into the soul-stirring strains of "Die Wacht am Rhein," drowning out the clang of the engine-room telegraph.
   The crowd on shore broke into a half-moaning, half-jubilant cheer.
   "Good-by! Good-by! God bless you all! Come soon back!"
   Outside the galley Herman lifted his cat almost like a child onto the railing and helped her wave farewell.
   On the fo'c'sle von Wecke continued to play "The Watch on the Rhine," and the crew joined in: " 'Das Vaterland! Das Vaterland . . ."
   On the bridge von Mueller felt a lightening of the throat. "Slow astern; a quarter port," he commanded. Steps sounded on the bridge ladder. He turned "you are a sight for sore eyes, Herr Mattheissen," he said. "I was beginning to fear you would not arrive."
   The chief pilot, an old friend, never seemed to laugh. At this moment he was more somber than ever. "I always arrive, Herr Kapitan," he retorted humorlessly.
   "Take it then!" von Mueller commanded. "We'll anchor for an hour in the outer roads. After that we'll be away.
   "You're unhappy?" Mattheissen looked surprised.
   "Would you like it?" asked von Mueller. "Look at them, cheering, singing!"
   "You've leading them to glory."
   "Glory! For God's sake, Mattheissen! Do you really believe?''
   "What does it matter what I believe?" the pilot replied. "It's what they believe. For their own sake you can't disillusion them.''
   Von Mueller looked grim. "No," he replied, "I can't, can You? Nor can French captains or Russian captain or English captains who sail today or tomorrow from different ports-the cheers and the music and the excitement. We each think that we are going to win. We, here, are sure of it, but win or lose, many on both sides will die.''
   The pilot turned away and bent over his charts. "That may be, Kapitan," he said. "Was any man ever happy with his lot? What better than to die in the service of the Emperor?"
   Von Mueller grunted.
   "You question it, Kapitan?" . .
   Von Mueller glanced at him coldly. "I do not question it for myself, Herr Mattheissen. If it were for me only!-'°^^ be content. But it is for those others, for those on the deck and the mole, that I am concerned. For myself and my men who go with me with their eyes open, I have only the feeing that we have made our bargain with Destiny, and we will be true to our agreement. We will not, we cannot, cheat Fate— and I don't mean death, Mattheissen. Destiny can deal us scurvier lots than that!"
   Mattheissen gave him a skeptical look. "Hummmph!" he grumbled. "Half speed forward! Full port rudder!"
   "Full port rudder!" repeated the helmsman. Von Mueller rang the engine room.
   The Emden swung back in almost a full quarter circle from the Imperial dockyard, then slowly churned to a halt and began her forward way. Along the end of the dockyard wharf the crowd that had gathered alongside shifted to watch her in the stream. The band finished "The Watch on the Rhine" and paused a moment before swinging into the next number.
   "A little more port rudder, if you please, Herr Mattheissen," von Mueller suggested, thoroughly aware that the only time a captain is not altogether king on his own deck is when a pilot is on board. He nodded toward the mole. "I realize that the regular channel is directly out, but we can scarcely slight our friends, can we?"
   Mattheissen nodded his understanding and respect, and the Emden slid out close along the mole, so close that her screws churned up the mud on the bottom of the harbor and the faces of the men on ship and shore were clearly visible to one another. Along the roadway the infantry, drawn up in ranks, presented arms smartly as the ship swept past, then broke into cheers, waving spiked helmets on their bayonet points. On the seaward side two batteries of field artillery fired salvo after salvo of blank salutes, ignoring all protocol regarding the correct number of guns for such a vessel on such an occasion. At the end of the mole the massed bands of the garrison again played "Die Wacht am Rhein," to which Uberhoboistenmaat Wecke responded with "Deutschland uber Alles." The men crowding the rails and rigging swung their caps and cheered vigorously—organized cheers, to be sure, following the lead of the CPO's navy style: "Hip-hip-hooray! Hip-hip-hooray! Hip-hip-hooray!" Just as it would have been done in any navy of the day. But now, all at once, there seemed to be a spontaneity and wild enthusiasm that caught at the throat and brought tears to the eyes, a spirit that would not be denied. And as they swept past, the crew of the Emden could plainly see the tears that streaked the cheeks of officers and men alike as they stood and watched their friends put out to sea.
   As the end of the mole fell away aft and the band broke off and started back to their quarters, the men were dismissed and broke into knots and groups that drifted either toward their own mess or toward their upcoming duty stations. On the deck below, von Mueller heard one seaman pause and remark to another, " 'Come back soon,' they said! I've a feeling it will be a long time before we see Tsingtao again. Max!"
   "You're right, mate," was the response. "A long time—if ever! But do you know something, Fritz? If we don't make it —if we're sunk or such, I don't think it will matter too much to us. We'll have gone down fighting, and isn't that what we agreed to do? We'll have done our share!"
   Von Mueller smiled thinly. At least there was something comforting in the thought. He hoped everyone aboard felt the same way.
   The Emden dropped her hook briefly in the outer roads, at the entrance to the mined channel, and lay there while the captains of the other vessels that she was to convoy came on board for their instructions. After the meeting was over and all the rest had returned to their ships, von Mueller passed the order to weigh anchor once more. Slowly as the setting sun crowned the Shantung Hills with gold and cast a soft pink light over the city behind them, the Emden, with the other ships following, picked her way through the zigzag channel. On the outer side of the mine field Mattheissen dropped down into the waiting pilot boat and saluted his farewell. Von Mueller looked down into his upturned face with a ghost of a smile and returned the salute.
   After that the engine-room telegraph jangled sharply in the evening air. The accommodation ladder was swung up and taken inboard and lashed against the rail, where it would be available for use in case of need, which could be frequent if the idea that was beginning to take shape in Karl von Mueller's mind were brought to fruition; or it could be quickly jettisoned if they should be abruptly called into action. Slowly she circled, reaching far out to port, while the Printz Eitel Friedrich followed a similar maneuver to starboard and the rest of the convoy formed a double line heading out into the swift, darkening waters of the Yellow Sea. When the last of the colliers had waddled through and steamed off to the east, a blinker spoke from the Emden's bridge, to be answered from the Eitel Friedrich. For a few moments the two ships talked across the dusk. Then they fell into place, in echelon, slightly astern and outside of each column, so that from their rear-flank position they could watch and guard. In this position they sailed, east by a little south, into the night.
   As the roofs of Tsingtao slowly seemed to melt together, then faded entirely behind them, while the sharp rim of the hills against the starry sky grew lower and lower and finally became one with the sea's horizon, a feeling of lassitude seemed to creep through the Emden. It was as though they had all been men running, running for all they were worth, straining their lungs almost to bursting, and then all at once were permitted to stop, to walk and dawdle, or even just sit and rest. Karl von Mueller was acutely conscious of the near-paralyzing effect. He felt it himself, and understood it only too well. They had all been under a severe strain, and most of them had been working steadily around the clock, with little rest before. For a moment or two he toyed with the thought of calling all hands to action stations simply to make sure that they were on the alert. But reflection showed him that such a move at this time would be unnecessarily harsh, and might even be. interpreted, with some justice, by the men as sadistic. There were times when such a drill was perfectly proper, even though it tumbled them out in the small hours and interrupted their sleep. But this was not one of them. Messages passing between the British and French, intercepted by von Guerard and his wireless watchers, indicated that both squadrons were well to the south, heading for rendezvous at Hong Kong, in conformity with orders from the First Lord of the Admiralty, Winston Churchill.

   The Russians were still well to the north of Shimonoseki. Consequently there was little danger of attack in these waters. The men had earned their moment of rest. Now let them have it—just so long as they did not relax their guard too long or too completely.
   All through that night and the day following and the night after that the Emden and her consorts steamed steadily and almost lazily—at least so far as Emden was concerned—following a southeast course through the Yellow Sea and into the East China Sea.
   During that time the water and the sky were empty save for themselves and an occasional island hanging like a cloud upon the horizon.
   But if it was a time for leisure in the Emden, it was scarcely so among her companions. On the day after their sailing the crews could be seen swarming like ants over the flanks and superstructures of the Eitel Friedrich and the Markomannia. By nightfall, with the help of a little paint and a little carpentry, the former had been disguised as a British P& O liner, while the latter wore the markings of the Blue Funnel Line.
   Early on the morning of the second day—indeed, well before daybreak—the buzzer at the head of Karl von Mueller's bunk sounded insistently, waking him from a fitful sleep.
   "Wireless room, Kapitan," came a voice in response to his automatic reply. "Von Guerard here. Sir, we have just intercepted a message to British naval headquarters in Hong Kong that the Canadian Pacific liner Empress of Japan sailed shortly after midnight from Yokohama for Shanghai."
   Von Mueller sat up abruptly. "So!" he exclaimed. "Thank you, Anton. I will be on the bridge in fifteen minutes. If you have any further news after that, you may reach me there."
   He rose and rang for the steward, ordering coffee and toast, and taking the time to dress and shave while it was being brought. There was no great hurry, though the news was important. The Empress would be a valuable prize—a most valuable prize. And they must, even then, be just coming athwart the regular shipping lanes between Yokohama and Shanghai. But if she had sailed only after midnight she could not be in the vicinity yet. His task just now was to get to the chartroom and estimate her position and speed and course, and lay his own plans for the stalk. When the steward brought his breakfast, he ate it slowly, all the while trying to guess the liner's present position.
   On the bridge he found Leutnant Eric Schall on duty and for a moment was startled, though there was really no reason why he should be. Eric Schall was half English, on his mother's side. Indeed, he had been born in London, where his parents had met while his father was serving as naval attache at die German Embassy', and had been largely educated in English schools, and even graduated at Oxford before entering the Imperial service at Kiel. Unquestionably he spoke English more fluently than anyone else on board, von Muecke not excepted. But his father was now an Admiral with the home fleet, and there was no doubt as to the boy's loyalty. It was only that the sight of him there, in the half dawn, suddenly reminded von Mueller of problems that had not until then occurred to him. Schall was only one whose ancestry straddled the current line of hostilities. Von Guerard was another outstanding example. An Alsatian, his father before him had been an Alsatian, born by law a Frenchman at a time when Elsass-Lothringen was a part of France. He had married a French girl from Paris, so that ethnically at least, Anton must be regarded as two-thirds French. By the same token, perhaps, to carry the point to absurdity, Franz von Hohenzollern, aristocratic as his background might be, had kin on both sides of this quarrel. The Czar of Russia was a cousin; so was the King of England—and the War Lord himself. But there was no question about Franz.
   Not that Karl von Mueller questioned any of them. They had all entered the Imperial service voluntarily at a time when there was peace throughout the world. None had been forced to make a choice between Scylla and Charibdis. Their devotion was not to be doubted. It was only that von Mueller had not thought of it before. Now it came to him: What must a man in such a position feel? Loyal as he might be, wasn't it inevitable that there must be some moments when those other ties pulled strongly at him?
   He kicked the thought aside and returned Schall's salute. "Good morning, Eric," he said. "It's still dark enough to use the signal lamps? Good! That will save us time! Send word at once to the Printz Eitel Friedrich and the Markomannia to proceed directly and as quickly as possible to the rendezvous named at the commanders' meeting. Emphasize that except in case of emergency strict wireless silence is to be maintained. Emden will rejoin at the appointed place."
   Schall's boyish eyes brightened, and he could not help asking, "Something's up?"
   Von Mueller's eyes stabbed him with a monitory glance. "I hope so, Leutnant!"
   He went into the chartroom, back of the conning tower, and bent over his charts.
   So far as could be foreseen, everything was going according to plan. The colliers and consorts continued on course, while the Emden bore due east to scissor the Yokohama lane—up and down and back and across. By early morning the other ships had fallen below the horizon and the Emden was alone in the burnished sea. Somewhere ahead there was a fat prize if they could intercept her. But there were acres of ocean. She could slip past. Von Mueller called his forward gun crews to "ready," a condition of alert still far removed from battle stations. Toward noon a smudge was seen to the east, and they headed toward it at full speed. But the stranger, brought over the horizon, proved to be only a small Japanese freighter without wireless who dipped her flag obsequiouslyand continued on her way.
   Emden acknowledged the salute perfunctorily and continued her vigilant hunt. At least there was nothing to fear from the Jap, especially since she was southbound for Formosa Strait and Hong Kong and must be well ahead of the Canadian liner. Late in the afternoon, however, another smoke was sighted, which on investigation proved to be the Japanese Toku Maru, a large passenger liner of the Nippon Yusen Kaisha, bound for Shanghai. Like the preceding Japanese, she, too, dipped her colors courteously. But as it proved she was equipped with wireless, and scarcely was she over the horizon when the Emden picked up her report of the meeting and the position, in direct contravention of the laws of neutrality.
   Von Mueller banged his fist on the chartroom table. "What are we doing, gentlemen?" he cried. "Fighting with shadows? Are these people to hide behind the cloak of neutrality and act as allies of our enemies?"
   "Sink the next damned Jap that comes in range, I say," growled Rudi Voss.
   "And let them say that we forced them into it?" von Mueller retorted. "No, Rudi. That is a matter for higher echelons of state than ours. We will simply follow our orders!"
   "We could send a party on board with a reminder of their obligations as neutrals," von Hohenzollern suggested. "As a matter of fact, we might do so under the pretext of buying beer from them. You know, Herr Kapitan, the Japanese beer is pretty good. It could be used to supplement the crew's supply."
   "And endear ourselves to them further, I suppose, Franz?" Von Mueller could not help laughing. "No. I'm afraid it would do little good, and in any case, I suspect the Toku Mont's warning has frightened our bird away. If that is the case, they will go a long way around to avoid us, and this is a sizable sea. We will widen our sweeps, gentlemen, and extend the range of our search. Meantime, let us hope that she will have some cause to break wireless silence, which will allow us to get a bearing on her. Keep listening, von Guerard. And the rest of you, when you have the duty, keep your lookouts alert. That's all for now, gentlemen. Dismissed!"
   But the Empress, obviously forewarned, remained elusive. For several days they scoured the area, ranging as close as they dared to Shanghai, until it became manifest that the big liner must not only have managed to escape them but also have got safely in to port. Only then did they reluctantly abandon their stalk and turn their bows once more eastward. They slipped through the Tokara Channel, in the R^nik^ni Islands, and out across the Philippine Sea, north of the Daitos and south of the Bonin and Volcano groups, then swung southward, around the Farallon de Pajaros, toward the rendezvous at Pagan, in the Marianas, where they arrived early in the afternoon of Wednesday, August the twelfth. There, to their delight but scarcely to their surprise, they found not only die big, heavy cruisers Scharnhorst and Gneisenau and the smaller light cruisers Nurnberg, Dresden, and Leipzig, of the East Asiatic Squadron, but also all of the vessels which they themselves had dispatched directly from Tsingtao.
   As she picked her way slowly between the anchored ships to come to a moor as near as possible to the flagship, the Emden was greeted with cheers of welcome from the other vessels—some small balm, at least, to their lacerated pride at having missed so choice a prize. Scarcely had her anchor found holding, however, when a string of signal flags ran up on the Scharnhorst's halyards, relaying the Admiral's orders to Captain von Mueller to come on board the flagship at once.
   Whether the summons meant reprimand or was simply routine, no one aboard the Emden, least of all von Mueller himself, had any way of knowing. He alone was aware that he had strained his orders to the utmost, and that he was two days late at the rendezvous. But the others could guess that the failure of their chase would hardly be palatable to the high command. They could only wait and wonder. As for von Mueller, he was ushered promptly into the Admiral's cabin. Von Spee greeted him almost woodenly, no smile on his thin lips, his eyes veiled almost accusingly.
   "You are late, Kapitan von Mueller," he stated.
   "Yes, your Excellency," von Mueller admitted. "I thought the prize worth the risk."
   "But you missed her," retorted the Admiral. "You might have notified us of your movements. You could have missed us here, you know."
   Von Mueller's face was as expressionless as the Admiral's. "I was aware of that, your Excellency, but I was under your own orders not to communicate with the fleet by wireless. In view of the possible value of the prize, I felt forced to act on my own responsibility. I am sorry that we did not succeed in intercepting her. If anyone is to be censured, it is myself."
   The Admiral broke into a quiet chuckle. "Sit down, Karl," he said. "I have no criticism to make of your action. In your place I would have done the same—and felt the same disappointment. It was unfortunate that you should have met the Toku Maru. Now, let's forget that. What will you have? Schnapps or sherry? It's all I have to offer." They settled to a discussion of projected operations—especially as concerned the Emden.
   When he returned to the ship an hour later, von Mueller was smiling, clearly pleased, both with himself and with the world.
   Von Muecke eyed him with concern as he passed through the wardroom. Franz von Hohenzollern glanced up almost expectantly. But "Leutnant von Guerard, my quarters, if you please!" was all the satisfaction any of them received.
   "At least we're not to be hung in irons," von Hohenzollern remarked. "If ever I saw a cat that had swallowed a canary—"
   "You never saw either a cat or a canary, Franz," snorted von Metzenthin, the quiet munitions supply officer.
   Von Hohenzollern looked up at him in surprise, startled not so much by what he had said as by the fact that he had said anything at all. "All right, Metz," he retorted. "What do I put in its place? Foxes swallowing rabbits? Men with a mouthful of oysters? Cats with a brace of mice?"
   The words were not much more than said when a tawny striped yellow tabby stepped in through the door and paused, glancing around, eyeing each one of them calmly, almost calculatingly.
   A shout went up that almost startled the cat back out through the door.
   "You see, Franz?" laughed Schall. "Perhaps there is a destiny that shapes our ends! What about it, pussy? Want to sit in my lap? "
   Without hesitation, and with feline dignity, the cat turned straight toward Leutnant Schall, crossed the room, and leaped up on his knee, settling herself comfortably in the crotch of his lap. Schall looked a little more than startled. All the others laughed.
   "Oh, come on, now!" Schall protested. He hated cats. "I didn't really mean that! Whose beast is this, anyway?"
   "Careful, Elric," chuckled von Muecke, "if you hope to eat again on this voyage. That's Herman's cat."
   "O-ooh?" Eric Schall said. "Nice \dxxy\ Nice pussy!"
   "Gentlemen!" Anton von Guerard's voice broke in from the passageway leading to the Captain's quarters. "Kapitan von Mueller brought back certain Admiralty' orders from the flagship that may be of interest to some of you. First: officers of the class of 1911 will advance in grade to the next following rank up to that of Oberleumant. Those of that year currently holding that rank will take brevet rank as Kapitanleutnant. Reserve, for the duration of the current hostilities, after which they may take the necessary examinations to confirm permanent rank—"
   "Hooray!" shouted von Hohenzollern. Who cared about examinations when the war was done? In any case, his own promotion was assured, and how could anyone know how long this thing was to last?
   Bunte Lange, of the same class, smiled gratefully. At least this would be something. Whatever happened to him, a full-grade lieutenant received more pay and a better family and subsistence allowance. He had looked that up long since. It would be a help to Use.
   Rudi Voss, already an Oberleutnant, shrugged. So far as he was concerned, the advance in pay meant little. It was only the rank that counted, and that was temporary. It was what was to happen in the next few months that really mattered.
   Nevertheless, there was proper celebration in the wardroom of the Emden that night. The new stripes were first soaked in salt and then properly wet down in champagne and beer, the ship's wine lockers being fairly well stocked.
   Next day, however, there were some aching heads and grim faces. The bells blasted all hands out of their hammocks before sunrise, and both officers and men were told off to their tasks. The Staatssekretar Kratke was warped alongside the Emden and close to a thousand tons of the coal she carried transferred to the warship's bunkers. Since there were no coolies here to do the work, the crews of both vessels were set to the task, and foe many, unaccustomed to that peculiar form of labor, it proved an eye-opening—if not eye-shutting—experience.
   Nonetheless, they worked steadily and well, one watch wing with the other until the task was done, the officers in command offering prizes for the winning side.
   In the meantime, through the day, though most of them were hardly aware of it, there were other, equally pressing, matters to cope with. Early in the morning, in response to a general summons from the flagship, Captain von Mueller went off to the Scharnhorst to a general council meeting. An hour later Herman Schultz, in a long white apron and his tall white chef's cap, knocked at the door of von Mueller's office.
   The executive officer looked up. "Come in, Herman," he invited.
   The cook stepped over the door coaming. "Excuse me, Herr von Muecke," he said. "I could not find the others, so I came directly to you. Can you tell me, does our mess receive supplies here?"
   "Do we need them?" Von Muecke was startled.
   "Kapitanleumant"—Herman looked apologetic—"we have been at sea for nearly a week. In the ice chest the space for fresh storage is not great. I have managed to maintain the table so far, but if we do not get fresh meat and vegetables soon, it will be hard to—well—keep it the same. Of course, there is plentyin the main locker, but—"
   "Sit down, Herman," von Muecke interrupted him.
   The big chef sat down gingerly on the edge of a chair. "Herr Kapitanleutnant—" he began tentatively.
   The yellow cat came in and rubbed its side against the door, eyeing them both with a cat's complaisant calculation.
   "Now, Tabby!" said Herman remonstratively.
   "She's all right," said von Muecke. "We're glad to have her with us. But now you, Herman, you must realize that this is war. It is not like ordinary peacetime. We cannot go where we will and maintain our larder."
   "I can get meat from the men's mess," Herman offered.
   Von Muecke smiled. "I—we understand your concern, Herman, but one thing we must not do is deprive the men of their proper rations—even their better rations, if we can give them. They are all called upon, far more than we in the wardroom, to put in hours of time at heavy manual work. That is especially so of the Heizer—the black gang—the stokers. We can live on tea. They must have meat. Now tell me, what is the state of our mess-room facilities?"
   "Well . . ." Herman looked doubtful. "There is perhaps enough fresh meat for a day or two. After that we will have to fall back for another two or three days on canned hams and tongues and beef. When that is gone, there will be only the fancy things that Herr von Hohenzollern has insisted upon, such as caviar, anchovies, sardines, and pate de foie gras, cheese, and the like. Of course, Herr Kapitanleutnant, I do not criticize Leutnant von Hohenzollern any more than I do myself. These things were for peacetime cruising and entertaining, and I am to blame as much as he. Bat this is the situation. Of course, Herr Kapitanleutnant, we have plenty of coffee and tea and rice, and a good supply of bouillon—"
   "And these will sustain life, eh, Herman?"
   "Uh—why, yes, sir."
   "Very good, then. If we must, we will make do with them. If it is possible, I will try to get some more supplies on board for the officers' mess. If I cannot, you will have to make our supplies go as far as they will. Is that understood.'"
   "Jawohl, Herr Kapitanleutnant!" replied Herman, and withdrew.
   Scarcely was he gone when a corporal of the marine guard entered with a batch of orders in his hand, followed by two strange young officers—one tall, very thin, and rather dour; the other of medium height, wiry build, and an obviously ebullient nature. Von Muecke glanced briefly toward the papers, then looked up inquiringly at the two officers. They both saluted promptly, standing stiffly at attention. The tall one acted as spokesman for them both.
   "Leutnants Adolph Gyssling and Roderich Schmidt, from Gneisenau and Scharnhorst, under orders reporting for duty aboard the Emden, Herr Kapitanleutnant!" he said.
   "Ah, so?" Von Muecke nodded. A few such shifts were to be expected. "You have your orders, I presume?"
   "I believe they are on your desk, sir," replied Gyssling. "The O.D. gave them to the marine when we came aboard.
   Von Muecke reached out for the papers. "At ease, gentlemen, while I have a look."
   He found the documents in question, glancing at them quickly before scribbling his endorsement and separating the copies to be retained by the officers themselves.
   "They seem to be all in order," he remarked. "Welcome aboard, gentlemen. You will find Emden somewhat less luxurious than the floating palaces you have been on; nevertheless, I am sure you will find her a happy ship and we of the wardroom congenial. Leutnant Gyssling, you will be attached to the port watch, under command of Kapitanleutnant Gropius. Leutnant Schmidt, we will put you in the starboard watch, under command of Kapitanleumant Gaede. For the moment, you may stow your gear in the wardroom. Then report to Leutnants Schall, of the port watch, and von Hohenzollern, starboard, and assist them as they may direct. You'll find them supervising coaling operations."
   "Jawohl, Herr Kapitanleutnant!" they responded almost in chorus, and left.
   Von Muecke picked up the rest of the papers left by the marine guard and skimmed through them, raising his eyebrows in wry amusement at one point. He had barely finished when a commotion sounded in the passageway outside. He glanced up with a frown.
   "Guard!" he called. "What's going on out there?"
   As he spoke, the draperies that closed off his office door were thrust aside and Conrad Lauterbach stepped in, looking very flushed and stern.
   "Why, Conrad!" von Muecke exclaimed in surprise. "I was just—"
   "Forgive me, Helmuth," Lauterbach said brusquely. "I have here something I think you should see." He pulled aside the curtain and spoke to someone in the passageway outside. "Bring them in," he commanded.
   An armed marine stepped in first, followed by three rather hangdog and very frightened, sullen Chinese, who in turn were followed by yet another armed guard.
   Von Muecke watched them in surprise, immediately recognizing the Emden's three laundrymen, Chee Jim, Chu Fat, and Wu Shee, "What's the meaning of this?" he demanded.
   "We found them stowed away aboard the Kratke," said Lauterbach.
   "Stowed away!" exclaimed von Muecke. "Why, for heaven's sake?"
   Lauterbach shrugged. "They say they want to go back to Tsingtao," he replied. "Someone seems to have told them that the Kratke is to return there."
   "I see," said von Muecke. "Well, tell them that none of the ships anchored here will be returning to Tsingtao until the war is over. In fact, I don't even know if any of them will be returning there then, so they might as well go back to their work on board this ship. When and if we have an opportunity, we'll try to send them home."
   Lauterbach chattered at the three Chinese, who looked first sullen, then surprised, and then crestfallen. When he had finished, they shrugged in resignation.
   "Take them back to their quarters," von Muecke ordered the two marines. They saluted and herded the three Chinamen out.
   Von Muecke turned to Lauterbach. "Thank you, Conrad," he said. "We'd have been in real trouble without them. I'm afraid all hands have been spoiled in that department. It was a lucky thing that you intercepted them."
   "Lucky for you," Lauterbach agreed wryly.
   "Lucky for you, too."
   "For me?" Lauterbach was surprised.
   "I started to tell you before you brought them in," said von Muecke, "but I had no chance to finish. I've just been looking over some orders that reached me only a few moments before you arrived. There's a set here for you, returning you to us. Kapitanleutnant Metzenthin is to take over the Kratke."
   Lauterbach smiled warmly for the first time since he had entered the cabin. "Now that is good news!" he exclaimed. "I was beginning to fear that I'd be stuck with an auxiliary. Here, at least, there's a prospect of some action."
   "That's one way to look at it, I suppose," von Muecke remarked. "Since you're here, I might as well endorse these orders, but I think perhaps you'd best go back to the Kratke until we've finished coaling and you've had a chance to turn her over to Metzenthin. When that's done, gather up your gear and come back. You'll find things a good deal changed since you saw us last. All the wooden partitions and bunks separating the officers' cabins have been stripped away—to cut down the danger of splinters, you know. It has enlarged the wardroom—fortunately, since we are all quartered there together now, half in hammocks, half on mattresses on the deck. It's not exactly the handsomest decor, but it is efficient, and oddly enough, it has a singularly unifying effect—as if we were brothers in a big family, rather than strangers who just happen to find themselves ordered to the same ship. I can't quite describe it, but I am sure you will notice it. Let me know when you come on board, and I will see to it that you are assigned suitable space." He scribbledhis endorsement and handed the necessary copies over.
   "Thanks, Helmuth," said Lauterbach dryly, accepting the papers. "You arouse my curiosity. I'll be interested to see this subtle change that you describe. No word from Tsingtao, I suppose?"
   "None," replied von Muecke shortly. And that was that.

   It was well past midday when Captain von Mueller returned on board. Obviously he had had his lunch aboard the Scharnhorst, for he did not call for food to be sent down to his quarters. Instead he punched his buzzer and sent out a call for von Muecke, When the exec appeared, he nodded toward a chair.
   "Sit down, Helmuth," he ordered. "Is everything going well here?"
   Von Muecke ran quickly over the day's events thus far. The Captain shook his head thoughtfully when he had finished. "I'm sorry about the China boys," he said. "Of course, we can hardly blame them. It's not their war, and they don't like to get so far from home. But there's no way to send them back now, and I think they'll be better off with us than if we set them ashore here."
   "That's what I thought," von Muecke agreed. "As for the officers' supplies," von Mueller went on, "I'm afraid well have to disappoint Herman this time. There just aren't any to be spared here. Perhaps we'll be able to pick up a prize or two that will help us fill the gap. In the meantime we'll have to take up our belts in the wardroom. You understand, of course, that the men's rations must not be stinted on our account?"
   "I understand that perfectly, Karl."
   "Good! Then we'll make out!" Von Mueller relaxed slightly, "Now what about the coaling?"
   "It's going well, Kapitan," von Muecke assured him. "Franz and Elric have made a sporting event of it and pitted port watch against starboard, with prizes to the winner, so that we are ahead of schedule. Trust Franz for that! And of course, now that Gussling and Schmidt have reported on each side, the pace is even faster than it was."
   "That's excellent!" said von Mueller, "Whatever the outcome, see that all hands engaged in coaling have an extra ration of grog when they go off duty."
   Von Muecke acknowledged the command half expectantly.
   Von Mueller did not disappoint him. "So much for our own purely local problems," he continued. "Now—the larger scheme, as nearly as I can see it. The main strategy will be to close the Pacific to enemy commerce and warships, as far as is possible. Since most of the shipping must come around Cape Horn, from Europe, the bulk of our force will be best employed in that area. We have warning that aBritish squadron is en route that way to Pacific waters at this moment. Accordingly, the Admiral will move in that direction with the bulk of the fleet. However, we should not leave the back door—the routes around Africa and India, by way of the Indian Ocean—open." He paused.
   Von Muecke waited politely for a moment. "And so?" he said at length.
   "And so, Helmuth," replied von Mueller, "I took the liberty of pointing that out to the Admiral, and I volunteered the Emden for that duty. You understand, of course, that a single ship cannot hope to stop the flow of French and British traffic through those waters entirely. However, a single raider, with range and speed, can be almost as effective as a fleet when it comes to disrupting commerce and communications, and be even harder to catch."
   Von Muecke looked thoughtful. "Yes," he admitted. "That's true."
   "Make no mistake, Helmuth. There will be nothing heroic in the role. Our duty will be to act like an old-time privateer—to sink, burn, and destroy. We must never attack a stronger force. We should not even attack a force of equal strength, for fear a chance shot might destroy our usefulness. We should not even attack armed installations unless we can do so with a reasonable assurance of success. However we might feel in the matter, we must always remember that our function is to disrupt and demoralize and spread confusion. The minute we are either sunk or crippled, our usefulness is at an end."
   "I understand, Karl," said von Muecke. "I am not here to play games any more than you are. What did the Admiral say?"
   Von Mueller smiled dubiously. "He did not say, but I think he saw the value of the plan. We are to stand by for his orders. Meantime, we will sail with the fleet—"
   "So you don't know?"
   "No, Helmuth," von Mueller replied quietly, "I don't know. Neither, I believe, does the Admiral himself at this moment. However, when he decides, he will give us our orders. In the meantime we will continue as part of the fleet. I tell you this so that you may understand what may be in store for us. I need not add that it must be entirely confidential. Right now I want you to order the coaling crews to speed up their work, and signal Chief Ellenbroek for a full head of steam as quickly as possible. Supplies will just have to wait until such time as we are able to replenish them, whenever that may be."
   The fleet sailed promptly at four bells of the evening watch, while the sun was yet red behind the dark volcanic cone of Pagan. Nurnberg and Dresden took the lead, with the merchants ships and colliers in twin lanes behind them. Leipzig held the left flank, hanging on the port quarter. Emden and the auxiliary, Prinz Eitel Friedrich, covered the right, with Markomannia following last among the ships of the starboard lane. The heavy armored cruisers Scharnhorst and Gneisenau brought up the rear.
   At sundown the orders were for complete blackout of all ships and full war watches. By dawn the merchantmen were in complete disorder, and it was only luck that prevented collisions. However, in the light of day they were soon brought back into formation, after which the signal flags snapped a Scharnhorst's halyards. They read:

   Emden and Markomannia detached as per Plan X. Proceed. Good luck!

   Von Mueller glanced at his executive officer. "Give us a signalman at the foremast searchlight for blinker reply, Herr von Muecke, and stand by the chartroom for the reply."
   He turned to the chartroom to make his response as quickly as possible. As he passed he spoke to the wheelhouse watch. "South by west a half south," he commanded. "One ninety-six degrees."
   "Jawohl, Herr Kapitan!" the wheelman replied. "One ninety-six!" Von Mueller passed on. Von Muecke was standing by.
   "Signalman ready, Herr Kapitan," the exec said.
   "Good! Let him send the following: 'Orders received and understood. Emden and Markomannia complying. God be with you and us! Hoch der Kaiser!' "
   Markomannia and Emden swung away to the southward at almost the same instant, and in little more than an hour's time the smoke of the fleet slid over the edge of the sea's horizon and the two ships lay alone.
   When the last tips of the fleet's masts had disappeared, Karl von Mueller first signaled Kapitan Fahss, of the Markomannia, to come on board the Emden. When he arrived, von Mueller struck the alarm button, sending all hands tumbling to action stations.
   Fahss was startled, half believing that some hostile force had suddenly appeared from under the islands, for there was rumor of British operations in the area. But Captain von Mueller smiled.
   "At ease, Fahss!" he said. "This is the best way to secure full attention. It puts every man at his post and on the alert, so that what we must tell him will reach his attention. There are changes to be made in the regular routine—yes. But more important is the fact that everyone here—and I include your crew in the Mark—must understand exactly what we are about. War, and I mean actual war, has not been in the experience of any of us. You and your men have worked and trained toward the merchant service. We in the Emdenhave trained toward the possibility of war. Now where you leave off we just take over, and you must accept reality—not as I offer it, but as it happens to be."
   "I understand, Herr Kapitan." Fahss nodded.
   "Good!" the commander of the Emden replied. "Then I will be able to hold explanation to the minimum. Kapitanleutnant von Muecke, is the speaker system turned on throughout the ship? Will my voice reach everyone on board?"
   "All ready, Herr Kapitan," von Muecke reported.
   "Very well," said von Mueller approvingly. "To all hands: Attention. It must be understood that we operate now under full wartime conditions. It must also be understood that few, if any of us, will ever live to see Germany again. This is not news to you, I know. But to hear me say it in words may come as a shock. I say it only because it is something that everyone of us must face. Each one of us, in accepting service with the Fatherland, has sworn his readiness to die in case of need. That need is now at hand for all of us. Some may survive, but for most of us this will be the last cruise. We must go into it with our eyes open, our heads up, our backs stiff—not only, gentlemen, for what the Fatherland expects of us, but for the respect we owe ourselves! I know that I could not face my Alaker if here I let myself be ruled by fear. I am sure that you—all of you—must feel the same. Let us, then, lift up our faces to our God and meet what comes with all the courage and determination at our command!"
   He paused. Fahss looked startled, as if he had never thought to analyze things to any such extent. Von Mueller smiled.
   "Nonetheless, men," he went on, "I do not suggest that we give up without a fight. We must render as good an account of ourselves as we can. We must be doubly alert. We must be ready at all times for any action we may be called upon to perform. In view of such a situation, there must be changes made in station and battle bills. In the interests of all, both officers and men will be quartered as near as possible to their action stations. Specific orders to this effect will be sent out today. At the same time, watches will be redistributed to meet full wartime needs. Each one of you will be given explicit orders. Until these are sent down, stand by your current duties. That is all. Secure!"
   He switched off the communications system and turned to Fahss. "You heard, Captain," he said. "This is truly a serious matter—for all of us. For some it must be harder than for others. To consider death is never easy for any man. But all of us must face it sometime. The question now is what can we do to justify our existence—and I suggest that with proper organization we can do a good deal."
   "I am at your command!" said Fahss.
   Von Mueller nodded. "I was sure you would say that. I only wanted it understood that we must work together. Since we understand each other, then, perhaps I'd best give you a quick summary of our plan."
   "Please do, Herr Kapitan," replied Fahss soberly.
   "Our primary objective," von Mueller went on, "is the Indian Ocean. Our orders are broad—generally much the same as those given to privateers in days gone by. We are to do as much as we can to disrupt and demoralize enemy shipping. We must try to panic him in his usual sea lanes. We must make him boost his insurance rates in accordance with the risks he runs. We must force him, whenever possible, to keep his timid merchants in port. We must inflict such losses upon his commercial fleet that he will be forced to reduce his fighting force, divide his squadrons, in order to protect his lines of supply. Divide and conquer is the theory. Do you understand?"
   "Understand, Herr Kapitan," replied Fahss. "I am ready for your orders."
   "Good. Then for the moment, at least, out first objective will be Angaur, in the Palau group, where we should make contact with the collier Tannenberg. If we can refuel from her, your own cargo in the Mark can be made to last that much longer. Meantime, we will try to maintain sight contact. Necessarily, at night, we will both have to sail under conditions of total darkness, and under no circumstances short of dire emergency must either of us attempt to use our wireless except to receive. In the event that we should be separated, we will each make our own way to Angaur and rendezvous there on the nineteenth. I believe that covers everything."
   "Zum Befehl, Herr Kapitan!"
   "Very good," von Mueller replied. "Only remember all communications must be flag signal, and if we should be separated we'll look for you at Angaur."
   In the few days that followed, as they slipped south and slightly westward, along the Marianas Trench and through the Caroline Islands, they were too busy breaking in their new reserve hands, fitting them into the sharp, split-second routine of wartime life, to take time out to search for possible enemies. The day after turning southward for their lonely duty they picked up a wireless flash from Tsingtao, giving them news of the Japanese ultimatum, and no one had any illusions as to the outcome. Officially Japan was not yet in the war against them, but there was little question that she soon would be—and that her first, if not her only, target would be their home base, Tsingtao. Karl von Mueller announced the news, for he felt that especially those on board with families in the East had full right to know exactly what the situation was. Yet he tried to soften the blow as much as possible.
   "The most recent bulletins," he announced in a special notice to all hands, "indicate that Tsingtao will soon be under siege. Japan, in an ultimatum, has demanded full military and naval evacuation of the city, and there is no doubt in my mind, as I am sure there is none in yours, that the order will be ignored both by the Imperial Government and by our own people there. This means, of course, that we will have no home base to which we may return. In the days to come, we will have to depend entirely upon what we can capture for both fuel and supplies. Probably more important to us all aboard here is the fact that it also means that those we have left behind will be subjected to the rigors of a siege. For your peace of mind may I remind you that international law requires our enemies, as it also requires us, to respect the rights and safety of non-belligerents. What may happen to us, on this ship, is only to be expected. We can, however, set our minds at rest for those we have left behind. I will keep you all informed of developments."
   He could not know, of course, of the ruthless philosophy that was to come out of the next few years. He believed that those who had no part in actual battle—the women, the children, the innocent who did not make it happen, but to whom it happened, no matter which side they chanced to be on— were to be protected as much as possible. That was the course he meant to follow. He hoped it would be the same for all.
   In their five-day quarter-circular sweep south and west into the Carolines they intercepted wireless transmissions suggesting that they were not operating alone in the area. From the call letters they were able to guess that the ships were English, though they could not be definitely identified, since the signals were in code. Their best guess was that the ships were either the heavy armored cruisers Minotaur or Hampshire, or both, and the lighter cruiser Yarmouth.
   Such a force was to be avoided at all costs if they were to retain their own utility. Still, had they realized that even as they slipped southward, just over the horizon, all three of the English ships were in the act of smashing German installations on the island of Yap, they would probably have turned and gone to the rescue despite their obvious inferiority.
   By so much as a hair, however, did they miss. They passed within less than two hundred miles at the very moment when the raid was taking place, but knew nothing about it until several days later.
   Kurt Witthoeft was watch officer in the still, dark hours of the dawn, when the dark bulk of Angaur loomed against the horizon. He promptly ordered the launch readied for lowering, and in accord with his instructions, rang the Captain's cabin.
   "Yes?" came von Mueller's voice quickly over the wire.
   "Angaur in sight, sir," said Witthoeft.
   "Thank you, Kurt," von Mueller replied. "Have the launch swung over and call its crew to stand by. Leutnant von Hohenzollern will be in command. See that he is called immediately. I will be right there." Von Mueller switched off his speaker.
   Two minutes later he was on the bridge, with Franz von Hohenzollern close at his heels. "We'll stand off here under cover of dark," he said, "while you take the launch in to reconnoiter. If the harbor is clear, let us know by lamp signal. If there are any strangers in the anchorage, come back and report to me at once without letting them see you."
   Von Hohenzollern saluted and left. A few moments later the Emden's naphtha launch, a type of small craft much in use by all navies at that time, was silently on her way.
   As it turned out, such precautions were unnecessary. The palm-fringed bay was empty. Not even the expected collier was there. In response to von Hohenzollern's flash signal Emden and Markomannia slipped in and let go their anchors in twenty fathoms of limpid water as clear as the air around them.
   They had scarcely found holding when a launch put out from shore, bringing with it practically the entire European population of the tiny German colony. The doctor was a Bavarian. Two government representatives hailed from Berlin. The manager of the phosphate company, which was the principal excuse for the existence of the outpost, and two of his assistants were Hanoverians. The three senior wireless operators were from the Rhineland, and there were half a dozen others from widely scattered cities. They came on board with broad smiles of welcome and obvious relief, bringing with them the news that only a few hours earlier the British had bombarded and destroyed the government wireless installations on Yap, and that they themselves had been living for some time in fear of a similar attack. For the moment, however, the British forces seemed to have withdrawn toward Shanghai to refuel and refit. Nothing had been heard from the Tannenberg, but only a few hours before their arrival a wireless message had been picked up from the Nordeutscher Lloyd liner Princess Alice, only a hundred miles or so distant, requesting instructions. According to the Alice's report, she had been in the South China Sea, midway between Singapore and Hong Kong, with some $ 850,000 in gold in her strong room, shipped by the government of India from Calcutta for Hong Kong, when she received news of the outbreak of war. She had gone immediately to the neutral safety of Manila, where she had managed to put the bullion ashore in care of the German Consul. She had not, however, been permitted to remain more than twenty-four hours in American territorial waters and had fled eastward, across the Philippine Sea, seeking refuge in the German holdings in the Carolines or the Marianas. Since she had already made contact with Angaur, thereby effectively upsetting the strict wireless silence that von Mueller had tried so carefully to enforce, there seemed little point in maintaining the ban. In any case, the island news seemed to indicate that it would be some time before the English could reorganize their forces for an attack upon either Angaur or the Emden. Accordingly, Emden immediately sent orders to the Alice to come in.
   Aboard the Emden the liner's arrival was anticipated with no little eagerness. The German Consul at Manila was known to be exceptionally alert, and it was inconceivable that he would have allowed the Princess Alice to leave before loading her to the gunwales with every possible sort of supply, short of coal or actual munitions of war, that might be needed by a vessel in the Emden's situation. Not that the cruiser was actually short of necessities, but especially in the wardroom, which was always the first to feel a pinch, there were a number of items that were running low, from soap to cigarettes, and meat to macaroni, tea, toothpaste, and toilet paper—particularly the latter item, which always occupied more space in relation to its weight than could conveniently be spared.
   To the bitter disappointment of all, however, when the Alice appeared, her Captain, her chief steward, and her purser seemed to have missed the Consul's idea entirely. As civilians they seemed to be far too overawed by their own responsibilities, and in accord with peacetime custom, insisted that the paperwork must be done first; with the result that everything that was transshipped had to be officially requisitioned in quadruplicate first, signed by the requisitioning officer, endorsed by Captain von Mueller, approved and signed by the Captain of the Alice, and then again approved and signed by the purser and supply officer and issuing steward of the liner. As a result little more than half the Emden's needs were met, though there was ample stock aboard the Alice. As a matter of fact, Franz von Hohenzollern fared better than either Captain von Mueller or von Muecke.
   As the officer charged with maintaining the best possible level of wardroom supplies, he was invited to accompany von Mueller and von Muecke aboard the newcomer. He went in a mood of some skepticism, since he had made the voyage out to the East as a passenger in the Alice only a few years before, and consequently was well acquainted with her personnel. The briefest moment was enough for him to realize that any supplies that might be officially released to the cruiser would first have to be neatly bound in red tape. Accordingly, he excused himself from the Captain's conference and withdrew to the Alice^s comfortable and well-stocked bar, where, over the rim of several glasses of beer, he did manage to cajole his erstwhile friends into the release of several cases of cigarettes, beer, wine, and coffee. At the same time, by excusing himself frequently on account of the beer, he managed to find and rob most of the "heads" on the ship, and even locate the source of the liner's supply of toilet tissue and raid it, passing out roll after roll through a porthole, to the hilarious delight of the crew of the Emden's boat.
   At the same time, he had the extra satisfaction of taking aboard himself as pleasant a cargo of fine Bavarian beer as a man could comfortably handle. God alone knew when another such opportunity might arise, he told himself. And since the good fellows in the Alice insisted on treating, glass for glass, he could scarcely, in politeness, refuse—even though they outnumbered him more than ten to one! As a result he managed, singlehandedly, to lighten the Alice considerably, while von Mueller and von Muecke wrangled over details with the civilian Captain and purser. When at last they returned to the Emden, he even shook the hand of the Alice's Captain, much to the clear amusement of von Mueller and von Muecke and the barely repressed smiles of the boat's crew. But no one else had accomplished half as much!
   Although the Emden was disappointed in the matter of supplies, when it came to personnel it was a different story. As senior officer present Karl von Mueller was able and quite ready to draft reserves. Since more than half of the Alice's crew were in that category, he might easily have immobilized her, and there was little doubt that he needed all the experienced merchant seamen he could get to serve as prize crews. But he was a reasonable man, and he recognized that it would serve no real purpose to cripple her. However, the chief mate, Kapitanleutnant Wilhelm Klopper, was a reservist and available for call. So were four of the eight other officers in the deck department, three of the engineers, two of the stewards, twenty-four petty officers, and thirty-two regular seamen, oilers, and firemen. In addition there were more than thirty volunteers. Of the last, von Mueller accepted eighteen—not enough to strip the liner, but still enough to give a civilian captain with insufficient courage to recognize a national emergency some trouble in finding his way to safety.
   All of the officers and men who joined the Emden did so with genuine enthusiasm, and even some relief, for almost to a man they recognized that here was no mere temporary situation, and if the Fatherland was in need it went against their consciences to hang back. Among the most valuable acquisitions at that time were a pair of quartermaster's mates whose familiarity with Eastern waters rivaled that of native smugglers and pirates—still no inconsiderable problem in those Eastern seas. But their real prize was Wilhelm Klopper, late chief mate of the Alice, who was not merely a seaman of great ability but also a man of genuine humor and understanding. Indeed, he was what the Spaniards call simpatico. He was congenial as a friend and respected as an authority, both a leader and a companion, a sort of cousin and confessor; a distinct addition to their company.
   They clung to the shelter of the island until almost dusk. Then as the sun dropped behind the rim of the island, all three vessels weighed anchor, standing generally west by south, toward the Moluccas. As darkness closed in, the Alice displayed a tendency to stray. Twice von Mueller ordered the Emden off course to go in pursuit and bring her back to her proper position. The third time she began to wander, he cursed violently. Klopper, who was on the bridge at the time, chuckled.
   "I'm afraid you're going to have your hands full with him, sir," he remarked. "The 'Old Man' just hasn't much stomach for wartime duty."
   "So?" growled von Mueller. "Then perhaps—" Instead of finishing the sentence he stabbed furiously at the buzzer to the wireless room.
   "Von Guerard!" came the instant response.
   "Break silence, Herr von Guerard!" said the Captain. "Contact the Princess Alice and inform her commander that unless she can maintain her assigned post we will have to abandon her."
   There was a moment of silence. Then sharply the wireless-room buzzer sounded. "Herr Kapitan?" came von Guerard's voice almost apologetically. "The officer in command of the Princess Alice reports his fuel in short supply and his engines in disrepair. He begs permission to abandon the cruise in company with the Emden."
   Von Mueller swore roundly. "Tell the damned milksop to go to—" he began, then stopped and got control of himself. "Von Guerard?"
   "Ja, Herr Kapitan?"
   "Inform the Captain of the Alice that he has my permission to break off. Tell him that my orders to him are to mate for the nearest Philippine port to avoid capture if possible. He will make such repairs as he is able there and secure sufficient fuel to carry him to San Francisco, where he will endeavor to obtain further supplies to carry him home. Under no circumstances is he to allow his ship to fall into enemy hands. If he is intercepted and such a capture seems inevitable, he is to open the sea cocks and scuttle the ship. Make it very clear to him that these are positive and final orders, and that copies are being sent both to his owners and to naval headquarters at Wilhelmshaven so that he will be held responsible for compliance. See to that, Leutnant!"
   "Jawohl, Herr Kapitan!" von Guerard responded with almost gleeful alacrity, and clicked off.
   The Princess Alice did not stand on the order of her going. In fact, her haste to leave the dangerous vicinity of the Emden was almost indecent.
   "The bastard!" snorted Klopper to Franz von Hohenzollem. "He is probably afraid Kapitan von Mueller will change his mind. That kind always seem to judge others by their own likeness! As a matter of fact, apart from the ship and the stuff in her, we're well rid of him."
   Within an hour the Alice was little more than a smudge on the western horizon, and it was only by relay, through Berlin, that they learned long afterward that she had made her way safely to Manila again, where she had been interned. At the same time, they learned that her Captain in his report had made it quite clear that von Mueller had summarily rejected his own brave offer of assistance and dismissed him with a sneer!
   Fortunately, no one was very much concerned. Von Mueller's own report of the affair had long since been received at the Admiralty, so it must be clear to Wilhelmshaven just who was embellishing the truth. As he could not have known what the Alice's commander was going to say, von Mueller could scarcely have colored his report to match. Irritation and contempt in the Emden's wardroom, coupled with a sense of genuine indifference, was about the only result.
   As the Alice disappeared over the horizon, the Emden picked her way southward, threading past Halmahera, Batlan, Obi, Ceram, and Buru, into the Banda Sea. They were deep in the Moluccas early on Sunday afternoon, and learned only long afterward that at the very moment a Japanese steamer dipped her flag to them the Tokyo government was in the act of declaring war on Germany. Since at the time, von Mueller could not be sure of the status between them, he ignored the salute and continued southward. Toward dusk the Emden passed a small fleet of fishing canoes heading in to Amboina.
   "Lucky devils!" said von Mueller, watching them. "Fun, fool, and frolic! That's their program. What do they know ; of war?" I
   "Would you expect them to, Karl?" von Muecke demanded. "Just the same, you give me an idea."
   "What's that?" von Mueller demanded.
   "Well, look at them," said von Muecke. "What do you see?"
   "A lot of fishing boats—what else?"
   "Exactly," said von Muecke. "But suppose one of them was not a fishing boat? Suppose none of them were fishermen? Suppose they were all torpedo boats disguised as fishermen? Where would we be right now? "
   "What are you driving at?" said von Mueller.
   "Well, we could hardly disguise ourselves as fishing boats. But we need not parade openly as the German cruiser I Emden, with a silhouette pasted in the recognition books of ] every navy in the world! We have three stacks amidships and four tall wind funnels, with a midships castle that has a characteristic break in the middle. Very well; suppose we rig a dummy stack just abaft the foremast, so that in silhouette we show four stacks instead of three. Then let us cut down the wind funnels so that they scoop the air from a lessconspicuous point. Third, let us bridge over the break in the midships castle. What ship would that suggest to you, Karl?"
   Von Mueller frowned, "Why, that sounds like the Yarmouth] Isn't that the way she's described in the recognition books?"
   "Exactly!" said von Muecke. "And isn't the Yarmouth one of the ships that is supposed to be on the lookout for us? If we had her wireless call letters and code, we would be better off. But since we lack them, at least her appearance could gain us some advantage. It would be a little while before we could be positively identified."
   The Captain chuckled. "You're right, Helmuth," he admitted. "Sooner or later they would see through the disguise. But while they were scratching their heads and wondering, we might be gaining an advantage, eh?"
   "So!" replied von Muecke.
   "So, what are we waiting for?" von Mueller demanded.
   All that day as they slid across the glassy waters of the Banda Sea, in near hundred-degree heat, the carpenters and riggers and crew, stripped to their trunks, worked to fabricate a false funnel of canvas and barrel hoops, and a false shed of gray-painted plywood that when quickly unfolded and set in place, filled the gap between the conning tower and the wireless shack, giving an unbroken appearance to the cruiser's superstructure. To confuse the picture even more, a false bow was made of gray-painted canvas, two-by-fours, and lath so that from a distance her prow would seem a graceful, yachtlike stem, while a false bustle was added to her sheer stem. All the devices were so rigged and constructed that they could be raised or stowed away, out of sight, at will, quite independently of the others, giving the Emden a choice of several different disguises.
   For the moment, however, there was little need to use them. They cut across the pass between the islands of Timor and Leti, hoping for a second rendezvous with the Tannenberg. But the collier did not appear there, either, and they were forced once again to refuel from the Markomannia. Beginning in the dark, steamy hours before dawn, they set to work, and to some extent made a game of it, vying for a prize of six cases of beer for the watch that loaded the most coal during their stay. Under the blasting heat the work was bitter and strenuous, and more than one man, accustomed to deck rather than stokehold duty, collapsed and had to be carried off to the sick bay to be revived by the Stabsarzt, Doktor Luther, and then returned to duty. But at least the ship was fueled for a time. The omnivorous fires could be fed for a little while and deck divisions returned to their regular duty— which never before had seemed like such hammock work!
   "Do you always stand this heat below deck?" said Franz von Hohenzollern to Ingenieur Haas.
   Haas lauded at him. "It's comfortable, Franz. In winter we are warm. In summer it is cool. Come look at the gauges if you don't believe me. The temperature below is less than what you have on deck most of the time, and when we come up for a breath of fresh air we catch cold!"
   "Schrumm!" snorted von Hohenzollern, "I'm glad I did not choose engineering duty! Hot or not, I like air."
   That was the general color of their progress south and west, under the Indonesian archipelago. From Leti they bore west, under the smoking mountains of Timor, pausing at intervals, when the occasion offered, to take aboard green hay for the Markomannia's cow and chickens and hutch of rabbits.
   It was von Hohenzollern who remarked sourly that "the damned beasts, with nothing better to do, eat better than the officers! Frankly, I could use a little green salad. I'm getting bloody well fed up with canned corned beef and rice, strawberry jam and caviar!"
   "This from you, Franz?" von Muecke laughed. "I thought you loved caviar."
   "I do, but not for breakfast, lunch, and dinner!" said von Hohenzollern. "Enough for any man. I begin to feel like a virgin sturgeon approaching the mating season!"
   "I know what you mean," replied von Muecke wryly. "But you must remember that the men need the milk, the eggs, and the fresh meat more than we do. We must see that they have them, at least insofar as we are able."
   "I suppose you're right," Franz sighed wistfully. "But that does not mean that we must like it. Perhaps one of these days we will touch in at Batavia, or some other neutral port, just long enough to go ashore for a decent meal!"
   In the galley Herman would have been heartbroken to hear him. Considering the skimpiness of the current sources, it seemed to the cook that he had worked magic with a few sacks of rice, some cases of canned corned beef, a dozen boxes of jam, and an abundance of caviar, chutney, pickles, and olives. But even he dreamed at night of succulent roasts and fresh vegetables, steaming in their own juices, of delicious soups, and hot breads soaked in fine fresh butter, oysters on the half shell and fish from cool waters, ices, sherbets, jellied soups!
   Still, this was war and they all had to remind themselves that frugality was in order. The news reaching them by wireless—mostly from Batavia now, or Singapore—was cheering so far as the war in Europe was concerned. Their armies were within a few miles of Paris and driving steadily forward, both toward the south and toward the English Channel. A number of major British warships had been reported sunk—by mines, torpedo boats, and by a new menace—submarines—while on the east the Russian drive had at least been checked. But even if quick victory blessed them, it would be weeks—even months—before they themselves' would be able to cease operations; and the word from Tsing-tao, coming less frequently now, was disturbing. The Japanese were preparing an all-out assault on the city and Tsingtao was girding itself. Friends, wives, children, and sweethearts were still there, and even if no harm came to them from such a siege there could be no question of the ultimate outcome. The garrison would give a good account of itself, but in the end the city would fall. When that happened, the crew of the Emden would be left homeless, adrift on an empty sea.
   Still, there was no good in worrying about that. To a man they had accepted that possibility when they volunteered. There was not a forced hand among them, and each in his own way recognized that Destiny must claim her own.
   At Tana Jampea they hoped to coal again. But as they steamed into the sultry roadstead at dawn, instead of the looked-for collier an unmistakable man-of-war came slowly out to meet them with battle flags flying.
   In the gray of the morning it was impossible to make out either her signals or her flag, and Leutnant Voss, who had the bridge, hit the battle bell, once more summoning the crew to action stations. The two ships approached warily, and were within a mile and a half of each other before recognition came. Guns were loaded and fingers poised over the firing buttons when the signal to secure all hands came down from the conning tower.
   The stranger proved to be the heavy Dutch battle cruiser Tromp, who informed them politely but firmly that their visit was unwelcome and their stay in neutral waters limited to twenty-four hours. Since the Emden carried only 4.5-inch guns to oppose Tromp's 9.6's it seemed only wise to accept the hint, especially since they were not at war. The Dutchmen were not actually hostile. But they were stubbornly insistent on their rights as neutrals, and only small nations standing between larger combatants can be. Von Mueller respected their position, and they exchanged beer and news. The former, at least, was good. The latter was that Portugal was now also to be counted among the Emden's enemies. Her crew chuckled when they heard this, for they had a low opinion of Portuguese naval strength. Nevertheless, it meant that the ports on the islands of Timor and Flores, which they had hoped to use, were closed to them.
   Tromp escorted them out of Dutch territorial waters and saw them on their way. Von Mueller was wily enough to head nearly due south, as if he intended to raid the coast of Australia. Only after they were well out of sight did he turn west once more. They cruised, with the mountains of Java and Sumatra hanging like low cloud shapes against the distant northern horizon, without once meeting a hostile ship.
   That, at least, was to their great satisfaction. Had they encountered any enemy warships they would, of course, have stood and fought despite their mission and whatever the odds. But if they could slip past all searchers unobserved, they were well pleased, even feeling some of the satisfaction of the fox who has eluded the hounds. By standing well off, under the horizon, they could listen without detection to the latest Reuter's reports and evaluate them to some extent. Whatever their truth, one thing was evident: there was no reliable report of their own activities or whereabouts. And this was important, not only to them but to the enemy— though he might not be aware of it—for it added to his confusion.

   A fleet of British warships [read one dispatch] is in search of the German raider Emden, which has fought viciously in our seas. Her frightfulness and record for atrocities is of a piece with German reputation. Sink, burn, or destroy her wherever she may be met.

   Von Mueller studied the message incredulously. It was impossible to believe the evidence of his own eyes. These people knew him. They had called themselves friends! The man who had signed his name to that wire had stood with him often at some friendly bar and lifted his glass to say, "To King, to Kaiser, and to Home!" He was no beast. He knew that von Mueller was not. Could he possibly believe what he had written?
   Von Mueller passed the message flimsy to von Muecke, who read it with a mounting flush of fury in his face. "He— sent this?" he cried. He also knew the sender. "Damn him! He should be sliced in thin ribbons and the skin flayed from his flesh! How dare he broadcast such utter—filth? He, of all men?"
   "Gently, Helmuth," said von Mueller. "Read a little between the lines. It was sent under orders—and probably at dictation. He probably feels as badly about it as we do—even worse, I would not be surprised."
   "I can only feel contempt for a coward!" said von Muecke.
   "You'll deny it, surely, Herr Kapitan?" von Guerard, who had brought the message, said hopefully.
   Von Mueller shook his head. "Listen to me, both of you gentlemen—Helmuth and Anton. We do not play games here. This is war, and we on both sides use the weapons at our command. Can't you see what that message is intended to do? They hope to sting us into a reply that would reveal our position. I would like to answer it as much as you. But to do so would serveno purpose for us. For them it would be invaluable. It would tell them exactly where we are."
   He glanced at von Guerard, who was trembling with suppressed fury. "There will be time later, Anton," the Captain said, smiling, "to let them know where we have been; to challenge them on our own terms. In the meantime we have an opportunity to prove ourselves their equals, if not in weight of metal, at least in intelligence. Let them guess! Let them not taunt us into betraying ourselves; let them seek us out in the silence of the sea! There's a lot of ocean to be covered!"
   Von Guerard looked doubtful. "I suppose you're right, Herr Kapitan," he said dismally.
   "You know well I'm right," snapped von Mueller sharply. Great God, did he have to baby all of them? "In peace we have friends. In war we have none. You know that as well as I do!"
   They held to their generally westward course, slipping along the underside of the islands and carefully avoiding any port. Never, between Timor and Kuta Raja—between the eastern tip of the Dutch East Indies and the western end, a distance of nearly three thousand miles—did they encounter a hostile ship. The men grumbled, wondering almost openly at their inactivity, but von Mueller pointed out that you can't catch what you can't see—and besides, it was possible that their presence was suspected and the seas swept clear before them. Not until they reached Simalur, near the western end of Sumatra, a good nine hundred miles beyond Sunda, did they receive any positive answer. This evidently came from the British cruiser Hampshire, talking by wireless, just over the edge of the sea:

   Emden only possible enemy in vicinity. Contact all ships in area. Track down at all cost.

   In the Emden they held their breaths. Was it possible they had been trapped after all this? Von Mueller sent a swih order to von Guerard:
   "Maintain complete wire silence!"
   Almost as if in reply came a message broadcast by Singapore Naval Radio:

   Emden believed close to Sunda Strait. Block passage and maintain close watch in area.

   Von Mueller laughed as he read it. "Let's hope they follow orders," he remarked with relief as he passed the message on to von Muecke. "Not even an Englishman can see a thousand miles!"
   "They're not leaving much to chance," said von Muecke.
   "Should they? Would we?" The Captain smiled. "They're only doing what their duty demands, as we would do ourselves. But I hardly think they would expect us to be sitting here in their laps!"
   The sheltered bay of Simulur—Lingani Harbor, it was called—was a delicious refuge. The narrow entrance and oval bay were fringed with rustling palms, and the hills around were just high enough to hide the tips of their masts. Even as they eased down their anchors, cautiously so as not to make too much noise, the Hampshire was talking, just over the hill to northward, with both Singapore and the Minotaur, which was ranging well to the east.
   In response to von Mueller's warning Emden kept discreetly quiet, though both von Muecke and von Guerard looked worried.
   Von Mueller reassured them. "Let them flock to Sunda," he said. "It's a natural place for us to go, and I, for one, would certainly search there if I were in their shoes. But you see, gentlemen, that is exactly what I thought they would do. They are all going there. We are here—nearly a thousand miles behind their lines. Now once we have coaled in peace, it will take them a little while to guess where we may have gone. While they are scratching their heads over the problem, we should have time to reach the Colombo lanes, from Ceylon to Kuta Raja and Singapore, Rangoon and even Calcutta. There, where they least expect us, we should have our turn!"
   "Do you think we can do it?" von Muecke asked.
   Von Mueller turned on him sharply. "It is not a question of 'Can we do it?' Kapitanleutnant! It is not a question at all. We will do it!"
   At Simalur they coaled again. It was hot—steamy, breathlessly hot, and accordingly, the wardroom doors were propped open so that whatever small breeze should find its way through the coal dust could also sift through the cabin. It was on that one, lone night at Simalur, September 4-5, that Herman's "kitty," prowling restlessly, searching diligently for just the perfect spot, found her way there. And behold! There was exactly what she had been looking for all evening. It was the most comfortable, the most dignified, the most uncluttered place on board for what she had in mind.
   Franz von Hohenzollern had been off duty two hours and was snoring in his hammock. Just beneath him Eric Schall, who had come off duty at the same time, sprawled on his mattress, flat on his back, too tired even to snore. He had not even had the energy to strip off his fatigue uniform before turning in. His sleep was that of a man who had earned it and would not be easily aroused. One leg was stretched down straight from his hip. The other he had at first raised, crooked up at the knee. But as he had sunk to slumber, his muscles had relaxed and the crooked leg had slowly slipped over sidewise until it lay on the mattress with the flat of his bare foot resting against the knee of the opposite leg. The position formed a rough triangle, a sort of sheltered pocket on the mattress, and beyond doubt that was why "kitty" singled it out.
   Cautiously she crept up beside the sleeping officer, paused, looked around her in the darkness, her cat's eyes seeing all that human eyes could not see in the intense blackout. For a moment she listened attentively to the snores. Then, finally reassured that there were no lurking dangers in the dark, she leaped gracefully into the inviting nest without so much as disturbing a hair of Leutnant Schall's leg, turned around several times as if to explore its compass, and at last fell to kneading the mattress industriously with her claws.
   It had been midnight when Franz von Hohenzollern and Eric Schall had finished their tour of duty and turned in, hoping for four hours' uninterrupted sleep. Franz was the first to be roused. Out of the blackness of the night there came a sound—not a loud sound, but certainly a different one from any he had ever heard in a well-ordered wardroom before.
   He lay still, listening, waiting to hear if it would be repeated. He had not long to wait. It came again almost immediately; the sudden, and by no means faint, sharp miaow! of a cat. Furthermore, if the tone of the cry meant anything at all, the beast was distinctly unhappy.
   Not as unhappy, however, as Franz von Hohenzollern, who felt that his own hard-won sleep had been unfairly interrupted. It needed little ingenuity, of course, to identify the animal. No other cat could possibly have stowed away since their departure from Tsingtao. Therefore the culprit could only be Herman's "kitty"." Franz spoke to it by name, at first cajolingly in the darkness. The cat paid no attention, but continued its wailing at increasingly frequent intervals, each time more loudly, each time more plaintively.
   Franz pleaded with it in whispers to go away. If it would not go, he begged, let it at least settle down to a comfortable purr and let him go back to sleep. The cat only miAAAooooOOOWed more persistently, and now, mingled with its complaints, there came other strange little squeaking sounds that Franz was utterly at a loss to identify.
   Having been unsuccessful, then, in using a low and gentle tone, Franz switched to a more commanding voice. He cursed the beast and ordered it out, threatening both it and Herman with the most drastic reprisals if it did not obey at once. The cat still ignored him, and in furious exasperation he felt around for something to throw, but there was nothing within reach.
   Driven by frustration, he forgot the rule of total blackout and struck a match. At first he could see nothing, though the light seemed to redouble the cat's wailing. Then he realized that the sound was coming from directly beneath him, and he thrust his head over the edge of the hammock and looked down.
   For a minute he could only lie and gape at what he saw. His jaw hung open, his eyes popped. There, squarely underneath him, in the cozy nest formed by Leutnant Schall's crotch and the crook of his knee, almost as if Eric Schall himself were taking part in the business, was Herman's "kitty," giving birth to as handsome a litter of kittens as ever were born on a man-o-war.
   When comprehension dawned at last, he could not contain himself. Where all of "kitty's" yowling and his own cajolery and curses had not the least effect upon his comrades, Franz's final hoot of irrepressible laughter was enough to wake the entire wardroom. Fortunately, at the same instant, the match he held aloft burned down to his fingers and was flung out into solid blackness. In the dark he could hear his shipmates stir and grumble.
   Then Helmuth von Muecke swore. "Verdummt! What in hell is going on here?"
   Franz crammed his face into his pillow and choked with laughter.
   "What is this? What is it? I demand to know!" Von Muecke's voice cut through the uproar.
   "See for yourself, Herr Kapitanleutnant," Franz finally managed to choke. "Look! Underneath my own hammock. What a papa Leutnant Schall is! I would never have suspected! Oh—oh! Forgive me, I must laugh!"
   Von Muecke alone in the wardroom had the privilege of a flash; a shielded light, thinly directed so that its rays could not shine beyond the area toward which it was aimed. He turned it now toward Schall's pallet, and even he could not help joining in the resulting howl of laughter which woke Schall himself.
   Eric heaved up on one elbow with a startled curse, then leaped to his feet, sputtering and fuming in anger, spilling cat and kittens on the mattress behind him. Several voices protested, warning him to be careful, and for all his irritation, his natural kindness and good nature quickly asserted itself and he insisted on organizing a raiding party which went first to the steward's locker, where a carton of tinned beef was emptied of its cans and the box brought back to the wardroom. Then since the cat was Herman's and it seemed only fair that he should contribute something, they raided the cook's cabin, rousing him, and demanded that he surrender one of his several pillows. Returning in triumph, they promptly made up a comfortable bed in the carton and "kitty" and her family were transferred to it.
   Only when all this had been done did Elric Schall turn his attention to wiping up both himself and his mattress. Ten minutes later he was stretched out, sleeping as heavily as ever.
   From that day on, Eric Schall was known to all his shipmates, officers and men alike, as "Papa Katz," while the kittens themselves were adopted as ship's mascots, and the officers off duty divided into port and starboard kitten watches.
   It was a small episode in their lives, but it served, more than any of them realized, to relieve the mounting tension. Not that any of them were near to breaking, or even were quarrelsome, but it was not always easy to live in their little world of frustration, always hunting but never finding an enemy at whom they might strike with at least an even chance of success. In such circumstances even a brief pause for a moment of mirth was good for their hearts and their souls and their stomachs.
   But the break was all too brief. By dawn coaling crews were out and scvirr\-ing back and forth again between the Emden and the Markonixnnia.
   Shortly after breakfast Oberschiifskellner Farber, the chief steward, reported seriously to von Mueke that they were running short of soap in all departments.
   "What did you say, Farber? We're out of soap?"
   "Very nearly, Herr Kapitanleutnant. What is worse, the fresh water is getting low in the tanks."
   Von Muecke pondered that. "I'm sorry, Farber," he said at length, "I'm afraid there is no soap to be had here. You'll just have to warn all hands to go easy and hoard your supplies for all you are worth until we can replenish them. As to the water, check the current gallonage immediately, and if it is necessary we will simply have to ration all hands."
   "Jawohl, Herr Kapitanleutnant!" said the steward.
   "And one other thing, Farber. Draw up an order to all hands, to the effect that since we are running low on both soap and fresh water, all water used for washing both persons and clothing—and see to it especially that the Chinamen understand this—must be saved with suds and used to wash down the decks. At least we can make what we have do double duty. We can rinse down with sea water."
   A little later von Guerard reported the signals from the Minotaur and the Hampshire dwindling toward the east. Apparently the British ships were converging on Sunda Strait in the hope of catching the Emden there.
   "Thank God for small favors, eh, Anton?" von Muecke grinned.
   Von Guerard agreed.
   But it appeared that one gnat was to be replaced by another. Toward midmorning a smart white launch appeared from around the point, almost buried under a huge Dutch flag. Von Mueller was on the bridge at the time.
   "Company's coming," said von Muecke.
   ''Ja, Mynheer!" said the Captain. "I see. Helmuth, how long have we been here?"
   Von Muecke calculated quickly. "Since about four o'clock yesterday afternoon, Kapitan," he replied, "say seventeen hours, more or less."
   "Thank you," said the Captain. "Pass the word, if you please, to the officer of the deck to send the Dutchman up to me as soon as he comes on board. In the meantime please ask Herr Ellenbroek to step up here."
   The Dutch Commissioner was a beefy man of middle height, with a red face and a suit of crumpled white linen and a pith helmet nearly as big as he was. He had come more than halfway around the island to investigate the report of a strange man-o-war in Lingani Harbor, and he was already irritable.
   "Mynheer Kapitan!" he exclaimed. "This is inexcusable!"
   "Forgive me, Mynheer ?" von Mueller began, and left it hanging.
   "Mailler! Mailler! I am Commissioner of this island," the Dutchman began, sputtering.
   "Ah, of course, Herr Mailler," the Captain interrupted him cordially. "Welcome aboard. Perhaps we are related through the differences of language. My name is von Mueller. Perhaps I can offer you something cooling while we discuss our problem?"
   "Our problem? Our problem! Did you say something cooling, Mynheer Kapitan?"
   Von Mueller signaled Farber, who was standing by. "Scotch and soda. Steward, and plenty of ice for Mynheer. You'll excuse us, Herr Direktor, if we do not join you. We are, you understand, on duty."
   The Dutchman began to preen himself on his sudden promotion, then turned slightly suspicious of all this flattery. "Quite! Quite!" he grumbled. "And thank you, but you understand of course that I, too, am here on official business. I have to investigate the report that you have been here for— how long did you stay?"
   "I did not say, Mynheer," von Mueller replied, "but I would guess that it was about seventeen hours."
   "Seventeen hours and twenty-four minutes!" the Dutchman snapped.
   "So long?" von Mueller looked concerned. "Ja! And I must ask you to leave at once!" The Dutchman took a long pull at his whisky and soda. "You understand these are neutral waters—"
   "Of course," said Von Mueller in a manner that was far more conciliatory than he felt. "But to leave at once—I am not sure that this is possible. I must consult my engineer." He turned to von Muecke. "Will you call Chief Ellenbroek, Herr Kapitanleutnant?" "Jawohl, Herr Kapitan!" Von Muecke joined in the play. Marine Oberingenieur Ellenbroek stepped from the wings, so to speak "You sent for me, Herr Kapitan?" he asked, saluting.
   "I did," replied von Mueller solemnly. "Mynheer Mailler, here, says we must leave at once. How long will it be before we can put the port boilers to work again? "
   Ellenbroek blinked, but his face remained wooden. There was nothing wrong with any of the boilers, and the Captain knew it. But he caught the cue, "It will be two hours, at least, Herr Kapitan, before we can even limp. After that we should be in fair shape."
   Von Mueller glanced at the Dutchman. "You'll give us that much time, surely?" "I shouldn't."
   "But you will?" said von Muecke. "Steward! Refill Mynheer Mailer's glass."
   "Oh, well, where's the harm?" The Dutchman laughed and held out his glass to Farber. "Two hours! What's the difference?"
   "What's the difference?" Von Mueller laughed with him and nodded to Farber, who promptly filled Mailler's glass two-thirds full of whisky.
   Under the circumstances it was not possible to pass the word down to the men on the runways that time was of the essence, but somehow they understood. Perhaps it was the fat figure of the Dutchman on the bridge coupled with the enormous Dutch flag that dipped at the stem of the launch below. In any case, they seemed to redouble their efforts, and by half an hour short of noon they had transferred more than a thousand tons of coal to the Emden's bunkers. They would have continued, but Mynheer Mailer began to show signs of restlessness, and shortly before noon the Emden cast off from the Markomannia, and both ships stood out to sea.
   The Dutchman, in his launch, accompanied them several miles along the way, every now and again lifting a tall glass of schnapps in their directions, as if to wish them well. But once they were beyond the reefs and into the long swell of the Indian Ocean, he lost heart and turned back to his peaceful island. Not a few aboard the Emden watched him go with more than a touch of envy.

   III
   SHADOW ON THE WIND
   September 1914

   Have you seen shadows on the wind? I have. They show like a quick flicker of substance against the mist or the fog, and then they are gone, and who's to say if they were ever there or not.

   They followed their usual procedure and steamed south and half east until they were well out of sight of both the land and the beefy Dutchman. Then they swung westward and headed for the steamer track between Colombo and Kota Raja, at the western tip of Sumatra. Much of the shipping for Singapore and Hong Kong passed that way, and it seemed a likely thread to cross. In any case, it was the closest, and the richer prospects, the Rangoon and Calcutta lanes, lay in the same direction.
   They were less than twelve hours out when the weather turned foul and they passed through a succession of battering white squalls, with heavy seas and slashing, soaking rains. As sailors they had met the seas before, but the rains were a true godsend, for by rigging canvas scoops and scuttles, and putting out every possible empty kettle and vessel, they were able to refill their nearly empty water butts and lay by a little store on the side for those who had thought to save their wine jugs after they were empty.
   Yet when they finally reached the Colombo-Kota Raja steamer track in heavy weather late the following afternoon, is seemed to may that Dame Fortune had been dawdling by the wayside. There was nothing there though they prowled the lane until well past midnight. Next they shifted to the route between Negabatang and Kota Raja, then to the Rangoon lane, with equally negative results. Nothing! Not even a sailboat. Everywhere they searched they found only empty tumbled ocean, wet and squally.
   Until then they had managed to contain themselves with some patience, but here, in the routes regularly used by the ships of all nations trading to this part of the world, it seemed to cruel that there should be nothing. It was worth noting, however, that at no time was there any shortness of temper between them. Nor did they lose sight of their mission. They made wry jokes about painted ships on painted oceans and Flying Dutchmen who preceded them with brooms.
   Von Muecke was concerned, and spoke of it to the Captain. "I wish we could find something—anything. This business of endless waiting is playing hell with the men's morale."
   Von Mueller smiled quietly. "I don't think so, Helmuth," he replied. "I think, rather, that a touch of disappointment will sharpen their appetites and make them more alert when the time comes. You know yourself that patience is the essence of the chase. The reward is in the game, and we will find it, mark me!"
   The wisdom of his words was proved within twenty-four hours. From the Rangoon track they made a long sweep westward to the Calcutta lane, after which they adopted a zigzag course, back and forth across the general track, trending generally northward, toward Calcutta.
   Heinrich Gropius had the bridge watch that night from eight to midnight, and perhaps by that chance won himself some sort of a niche in history. It was at seven bells of his watch—11:30 p.m. to most of us—that his lookout sighted the first lights of a possible prize. They bore dead ahead, and were in no way shielded. Obviously the ship assumed the area was completely protected and had no inkling of the Emden's presence.
   Gropius made sure first that the lights were no mirage. Then he pressed the alarm button that sent all hands to action stations.
   In some mysterious way his own excitement seemed to communicate itself through his fingers. As the bells rang, they seemed to say, "This is no drill!"
   The men rumbled out and ran barefoot to their stations. Officers slipped quickly into place and stood by their communicators. Gropius' thumb was scarcely off the button before von Mueller's voice spoke at his elbow,
   "What is it, Heinrich? You have raised something?"
   "Dead ahead, Herr Kapitan," Gropius replied, "a steamer with lights—unidentified. Apparently she is not aware of presence yet, I have ordered Leutnant von Guerard to jam any signals she may try to send."
   "Good work!" replied von Mueller. It was his own responsibility, of course, but it was always a relief to know that matters were properly ordered on the bridge before he arrived.
   He leveled his glasses on the lights ahead. "We'll overhaul on her port side," he said. "Alert the forward battery, starboard, to stand by to lire a blank first, then a live charge if she fails to stop. Have the duty signalman stand by at the wing of the bridge to transmit by blinker, and ask Oberleutnant Lauterbach to sway out the number-three boat and muster his boarding party for immediate action."
   Von Mueller turned to study the stranger. Clearly she was no man-o-war since she was ablaze with light. Neither could she be a large ship, to judge from the distance between her masthead and stem lights. Probably, he thought, only some ocean tramp. Still, she was a prize, and any prize was what they needed just now, if only for the sake of morale.
   But even after all this it almost seemed that Dame Fortune was laughing up her sleeve. The stranger hove to at the first blank shot that stabbed at her out of blackness of the night.
   The Emden's boat swung down swiftly, and the boat's crew and armed boarding party, under command of Conrad Lauterbach, tumbled over the side. There was a long pause while I they headed out across the black heaving water and clambered up the stranger's side. Then presently from the other ship's bridge came the blinkered signal:
   Greek Fontoporros . . .
   Karl von Mueller, watching through his glasses, felt as if he had been kicked in the stomach. It couldn't be! It was unfair. Under international law, the Greek must be let go—unless . . . Well, the chances were slim that she was carrying contraband. Under the same international law, neutrals were under obligation not to reveal the position of belligerent warships as they were met. In that respect von Mueller had to admit that the Dutch they had encountered had been scrupulous. But this Greek might not be so fair. In spite of himself von Mueller shared the Nordic's mistrust of all Mediterranean peoples.
   The blinker was going again on the Fontoporros bridge:
   Calcutta for Bombay [read the message].Lading 6500 tons Calcutta coal for British Government.
   Von Mueller's heart bounded. Coal for the Indian Government! That at least was contraband and confiscable under the rules of war. Swiftly he dictated his reply, and the signalman blinked the message back to the waiting Greek:
   Cargo contraband, should be transshipped or jettisoned. No opportunity here for either. Must (1) sink ship and cargo and abide by court decision later or (2) commandeer carrier and cargo until opportunity offers to transfer cargo and release ship to neutral service. Suggest charter Pontoporros at expense of German Government, to accompany Emden until such time as transfer feasible and release of vessel possible. Same terms as offered by British charterers. Answer.
   There was a long span of waiting, and von Mueller could sense the impatience of the men who lined the rails under the bridge. Nearly an hour passed before the signal came back from the Greek:
   Accepted.
   "Secure all stations, Herr Gropius," von Mueller said. "Maintain strict watch. Ask Oberleutnant Lauterbach to report to me at once, leaving first subordinate in command. Fontoporros to join Markomannia in convoy. Understood?"
   "Understood, Herr Kapitan!" replied Gropius promptly.
   When Lauterback came back on board and reported the Greek Captain's acceptance, his account was almost comical.
   "I told him he had a choice," he said, "sink now or be paid later. He waved his hands. 'Who am I?' he asked. 'A Greek neutral!' 'But you carry contraband cargo for the British,' I pointed out, 'so we can sink you if we must. But you wouldn't like that.' 'Oh, no, no!' he cried with a lift of his shoulders and spread of his hands. 'Let us gamble! If your government will guarantee my charter, what difference does it make to me? The cargo was English, but now you claim it. You want me to carry it, and guarantee the regular charter rates. How can I refuse?' "
   "A sensible man." Von Mueller chuckled. "Just make sure he cannot send out an alarm. Dismantle his wireless. The simple removal of a single part should be enough."
   "As you suggest, Kapitan!" Lauterbach saluted and turned way.
   The Greek Captain proved thoroughly co-operative. He was a blocky man with great black mustachios and black, sharp eyes, and he made it clear that it mattered little to him who paid the charter of his ship—so long as he got his money. As for the cargo, he was paid only to carry it. Who claimed it was no affair of his. But, for the time being, von Mueller felt, it would be safer for Lauterbach and his prize crew to remain aboard.
   The Greek had scarcely fallen in abeam the Markomannia before another steamer's smoke was sighted on the northern horizon. Since the stranger was bearing down directly toward them, Emden dropped back, behind her two consorts, and the newcomer came on confidently, tranquilly assured, apparently, that there could be no enemy warships in these seas. When the time came, the Emden pushed out past the Markomannia and the Pontoporros and fired a blank shot. The stranger's confusion was evident, but she halted and obeyed the Emden's instructions to the letter. It was not necessary' to jam her signals. She sent none.
   The Emden's boat, with a prize crew under command of Hans von Levetzow and Vizesteuermann Meyer, swung out and bounced across the tumbling seas to the waiting captive. Presently a flag signalman waved the message from the stranger's bridge:
   S/S Indus, British, 3413 tons, Calcutta to Bombay, under charter to Indian Government as troop carrier. Cargo, horses, livestock, ship tools, parts, and soap.
   Half the crew of the Emden recognized the signal and sent up a spontaneous cheer.
   Helmuth von Muecke glanced at Karl von Mueller and grinned.
   ''These English! They are so clean! We should thank them tor that. You'd better go over and be sure of it, Helmuth" said von Mueller. "Take a sorting crew and several boat rescue whatever is of value, especially all the soap."
   "They spoke of horses," said von Aluecke tentatively.
   Von Mueller's jaw set. "They say the French eat horse meat he replied. "So do dogs. We don't yet! I'm afraid you II have to take your pistol and kill the animals as you find them. We've no room for them on board the Emden The ship must be sunk. I am sorry for them, but it cannot be helped. At least we will be taking no human lives. Have the crew transferred to the Markomannia's prisoners' quarters. Let no one be hurt if it can possibly be avoided."
   "Jawohl, Herr Kapitan," von Muecke responded, and turned away.
   Apparently their luck had changed with the taking of bidus. Here was a prize worth cruising for. Besides the soap so needed on board the Emden, there were uncounted other Items of dire need. There were towels, linens, tinned foods, fresh meat, live hens and ducks, drinks, nautical instruments, charts, pencils, and oilskins—which last were especially necessary at the moment. Everything movable, including casks of fresh water and even lifeboats, was taken to be released at far distant points. But the hardest part came last—the horses. Among them was one particularly fine animal, obviously a race horse.
   Von Muecke went to the stall with his pistol smoking and tears m his eyes. "I am sorry, my friend, that it must be this way," he said. "Yet it is easier than drowning. Forgive me, please." When he came away, his face was green. "You have placed the explosives, Herr von Levetzow?" he asked.
   Jawohl, Herr Kapitanleutnant," von Levetzow replied.
   "And have the boats gone with everything of possible value?" ^
   "They have cleared, Herr Kapitanleutnant."
   "Very well, then, set the fuses, open the sea cocks, and order all hands to abandon ship," von Muecke commanded.
   "Jawohl, Herr Kapitanleutnant!"
   It is always a sad experience for any sailor to watch a ship go down. It is worse when he himself has had a part in the sinking. It is as if a piece of himself has gone with it, down and down and down, into the deeps. The Indus had yielded up rich booty. Still, it was distressing to watch her go, particularly with her cargo of horseflesh. Nor did she sink easily. A dozen shells were needed in her midships to complete the work. Only then did she turn slowly turtle and disappear beneath the waves.
   Fortunately, the next morning was occupied with the distribution of the spoils; soap to all hands in abundance, linens and towels to the steward's department, spare parts to the engine room, navigation instruments to the bridge, fresh meat to the ice lockers, and ducks and hens to cages astern, so that the ship looked something like a traveling menagerie. At least the officers would have some small respite from the monotony of rice and bully beef and caviar.
   The shift in their luck was almost too evident. The very next day, they intercepted the British S/S Lovat, 6012 tons.
   Her crew was transferred to the Markomannia and the most recent newspapers were rescued, after which they regretfully sent the hapless vessel to the bottom.
   It was not surprising that the newspapers, full as they were of Allied reports, came as a great shock. According to them, all Germans and their sympathizers were beasts and brutes. They were labeled "Hun" and "Boche" by their enemies, and all manner of atrocity and wickedness, gross lust and swinish behavior laid at their door; and they forgot that they themselves were tending to adopt much the same attitude toward the folk on the opposite side. In the case of the Emden both officers and men, isolated in their own small world as they were, were apt to lose sight of the fact that this sort of moral warfare was largely a calculated part of Allied strategy, and that specific instances were aimed directly at actual occurrences on the two Western battle fronts and the North Atlantic and North Sea. Knowing that they themselves had been guilty of nothing of the sort, they still took the charges as directed specifically at them, and they resented what they knew to be bald lies in their case. To them it seemed incredible that many of the very men who were spreading these tales of hate had been their own individual friends in days not so long past; men with whom they had stood together at bars, in whose homes they had visited, with whose wives and daughters they had danced at diplomatic and naval receptions around the world; men whom they knew to be decent and friendly if left to their own good judgment, and who just chanced to speak a different language. How, they could not help but wonder, could any reasonable person believe such rot about another—especially another whom he knew? How could they suddenly change, face about, and regard them as vicious murderers?
   After studying the highly colored account von Muecke gave voice to some of their thoughts. "I wonder if anyone will remember us decently when all this is done. Will they try' to understand what we were doing? Will they recognize the fact that we were only carrying out our duties as painlessly and humanely as war will allow? Or will we just be forgotten? What effect will we have on the shape of tomorrow? "
   "We're not here to influence the future," von Mueller retorted. "We have a duty to be done today, and let tomorrow take care of itself. It's not likely that many of us will be here to see or care about it."
   That was something of their mood a few hours later, toward midnight, when they raised the lights of yet another steamer to northward. The night was calm and the seas sleek, with little more than a gentle swell. There was a bright moon, and a faint breeze carried the steamer's and the Emden's smoke in parallel dark ribbons away toward the southwest.
   It seemed incredible that she did not see them, for even without lights every' man aboard the cruiser felt they lay etched sharply against the sea in the moonlight. But no doubt their darkened bulk blended to invisibility' against die blackness of the water. The stranger came on, obviously un^tnt-ting, until she was well within gun range. Then the Emden's blinker signal brought her to.
   Despite her surprise she was docile and orderly. Lauterbach commanded the prize crew in the whaleboat that crept like a many-legged water beetle across the moon track that separated the two ships. By the same token he was first up the rope ladder that had been hung over the freighter's side.
   At the gap of the gangway, as he swung his leg over, he found the ship's Captain—and rather startling, an obviously frightened wife and a very tearful child.
   He glanced in their direction. Their presence certainly complicated matters. "If you please, madame," he said, "don't worry. We won't hurt you—any of you." He shot a glance at the child. "And you, young one, stop crying. You're not hurt."
   The boy only howled louder. Lauterbach put his hand in his pocket, found a silver Mark, and held it out to the youngster. "I'll bet you haven't one of these in your collection."
   The child stopped howling and took the coin curiously. Lauterbach smiled reassuringly at the woman. "Please don't worry, madame," he repeated.
   "B-but you're—German!" the woman sputtered.
   "Yes, I am," he replied, "but I really don't eat little English children." He turned to her husband. "I'm sorry, sir," he said. "I'm afraid I must ask to see your papers."
   The Englishman looked belligerently unhappy. "Fat lot o' good it'd do me to refuse, eh? " he replied.
   "Quite so!" said Lauterbach coldly. "We might have to sink you in that case."
   "Arrv^!" protested the woman in a tone of alarm.
   "No fear!" snarled the Captain in a voice of disgust. "But it'll be a cold day before I bring you two to sea with me again!"
   To Lauterbach he said, "This is the S/S Kabinga, London registry, 4657 tons, Calcutta for Bombay and New York. Most of our cargo is piece goods, American-owned."
   "I see," replied Lauterbach dryly. "That's a bit of luck for you, isn't it, Captain? "
   The Englishman shrugged. By this time the rest of the prize and demolition crews had scrambled up to the Kabinga's deck and stood waiting instructions. According to international law, had both ship and cargo been British, Lauterbach could have ordered her sunk after removing her crew to safety. Since only the carrier was British, however, and the cargo neutral, the Emden—and through her, of course, the German Government—would be liable to the American owners for the value of the cargo thus destroyed. Moreover, there were the English Captain's wife and child to complicate matters. As the Captain himself had implied, sailors took their chances with the sea. But what should one do about them?
   Lauterbach summoned the signalman, who had come with the boarding party, and ordered him to flash a brief summary of the situation to the waiting Emden.
   The response was quick:
   Kabinga join convoy for later disposition. Prize crew and Kommando guards remain on board under your command. Demolition crew return to Emden. Maintain alert lookout and guards at all times. Display no lights, and follow Emden.
   Captain Robinson, as his name proved to be, looked unhappier than ever.
   "What did all that mean?" his wife asked apprehensively.
   Lauterbach explained the exchange briefly but forcefully. In the pale moonlight he could see the color drain from her drably pretty face. But even without that the way she clutched her little son close to her skirts told him of her alarm.
   "Oh, whatever are we to do?" she wailed. "What will become of us?" The boy, sensing her fright, began to blubber.
   "I can assure you, madame," Lauterbach told her, "that no harm will come to you—providing your husband obeys orders. Kapitan von Mueller probably intends to use this ship as a cartel—"
   "A—What's that?" she demanded.
   " 'E means for us to do 'is dirty work!" her husband broke in.
   "On the contrary!" Lauterbach said sharply. "To serve as a cartel is to serve humanity. You see, madame"—he nodded in the direction of the Emden and her consorts—"out there we have a considerable number of prisoners—officers and crews taken from the ships we have been forced to sink. We could not have turned those men adrift in open lifeboats with any pretense of human decency. Accordingly, we have been forced to take them aboard our own ships, and feed and supply them until such time as we can send them safely ashore. Naturally, the more ships we sink, the greater becomes this burden. Since we have no bases in this part of the world and all ports within range are closed to us, we are forced to keep all those prisoners aboard until such time as we overhaul a ship that we can legitimately use to serve as a cartel; a ship to which we can transfer these men under a flag of truce, to be carried to the nearest port available. Since your ship carries neutral cargo, it would be inconvenient to sink it. That is why I believe Kapitan von Mueller will use her as a cartel."
   The woman seemed to be at least partially reassured. She even patted her son reassuringly on the shoulder, and the child gradually stopped his sniffling.
   "Very good, then!" Lauterbach went on. "Since we understand one another, madame, I suggest that you and the boy retire to your cabin and stay there. Remember, not the tiniest pinpoint of light may be shown from this ship, so I suggest that you block up your portholes tightly. If you feel you must have more air during the night, turn off the lights before opening the ports."
   She nodded and slipped away in the darkness. Lauterbach turned to the Captain. "We'll want you on the bridge, Captain, for a while, at any rate. Meantime, I'll ask you to stay close by me."
   Captain Robinson shrugged indifferently, but at least this time he did not object.
   Although it had been well before midnight when they halted the Kabinga, it was nearly three hours before they were on their way again and prowling in orderly formation northward along the Calcutta track. On board the Emden, Captain von Mueller withdrew to his cabin to catch a few hours of sleep. One by one the rest of the ship's company, save of course those still on duty, followed his example and took to their hammocks.
   On the Kabinga matters were much the same. Once she was away on course, with the dim bulk of the cruiser faintly etched against the darkness of the night. Lauterbach escorted Captain Robinson to his cabin and bade him goodnight.
   "You may as well get what sleep you can, Captain," he told the Englishman. "We'll have no further need for you until morning, but then, I daresay, we'll be at work by sunup."
   "You'll watch out for 'er?" Robinson was anxious.
   "Set your mind at rest, Captain," Lauterbach replied.
   The Englishman shrugged. "As you will," he said.
   As in most freighters, the chartroom on the Kabinga stood directly abaft the wheelhouse, and communicated with it by a door in the intervening bulkhead. Inside were the long chart cabinet and the breast-high chart desk. There was also, along the side opposite the chart desk, a hard, narrow, worn, plush-covered settee, upon which the Captain or one of his officers could catch a few moments of rest during times of stress and storm, when the hours of duty on the bridge were exceptionally long. It was to this hard settee that Lauterbach finally turned. He was satisfied that everything was in good order, and he had been aboard the Emden long enough to be aware that a man must rest while he could, for none could tell when he would have another chance. But it seemed to him that his eyes had scarcely closed and his body begun to relax when the voice of the helmsman cut sharply through die swirling fog of sleep.
   "Herr Kapitan!"
   Even before his eves were fully open, Lauterbach was in the wheelhouse. "W'hat is it, Monkedeik?" he demanded.
   The chunky little helmsman pointed forward, through the thin blue glow of the binnacle light. "Ship's lights, Kapitan," he replied, "ahead two points to starboard and bearing this way. Also signals from the Emden."
   Neither the question nor the response was altogether necessary. Even as Monkedeik spoke, Lauterbach had taken in the situation at a glance. The stranger was running quite unconcernedly, fully lighted, down from the north on a tangent that would carry her little more than a mile or two astern of them if all continued on their present course. Probably she was no man-of-war. Had she been, she would not have risked running with lights. More likely she was another unsuspecting merchantman, fatuously confident that in these waters, at least, she was safe, watched over and protected by the mighty British fleet.
   Although assumptions were always a matter of risk, Captain von Mueller apparently shared Lauterbach's opinion, for the orders being linked at them from the cruiser's fantail— whence they could not be observed by the oncoming stranger—read:
   Follow at dead slow speed. Maintain relative positions. Disperse only if action develops.
   It concluded with a point of rendezvous—latitude and longitude—in the event of dispersal, and a warning not to reply or acknowledge lest the newcomer be alerted.
   Having delivered these orders, the Emden sprang suddenly to life, half wheeled, and went churning off at top speed in the direction of her prey.
   From his vantage point on the bridge of the Kabinga, Lauterbach watched her go with a feeling of regret. At the same time, he had to admit that it was rather pleasant to be a spectator ^nv once.
   When the cruiser pulled up within range, he could not be sure of her orders. Her bulk, which lay between the stranger and the Kabinga, blocked off his view of their signals. But even at a distance he was able to catch the blinkered response from the other ship:
   S/S Killin, British, Calcutta to Bombay, cargo six thousand tons Indian coal for government.
   Mfi.'-'-ers moved more rapidly after that. The blinker from the Emden signaled the rest of the convoy to close in:
   Convoy resume posts as before. Killin take position three hundred yards astern Kabinga, two points on port quarter, abreast Fontoporros.
   Lauterbach chuckled as he went back to the hard, narrow couch in the chartroom. Captain Robinson and his wife and child had apparently slept soundly through the entire operation. He wondered what would be their reaction in the morning when they woke and came on deck to find that in the night their little flock had hatched another Q^g.
   Things were quiet after that for the rest of the night. Before dawn the skies became overcast and a series of squalls thundered down on them out of the northeast, hammering them with gusty seas and lashing rain; not bad enough to tax their seamanship, but rough enough to make it impossible to transfer their prisoners, as Karl von Mueller had hoped to do. During a brief lull between squalls, however, the Emden did manage to pass over a boat with a relief squad of marine Kommandos, under Rudy Voss, to assist Lauterbach in the Kabinga, while Markomannia sent a similar boatload of men, under Kapitanleutnant Klopper, to the Killin to reinforce the crews already on board so that they would have an opportunity to stand guard in shifts, giving each a little rest.
   As Leutnant Voss came over the side and reported to Lauterbach, the latter correctly presented him to Captain and Mrs. Robinson. Voss clicked his heels as any proper German would, and bowed slightly to each. Probably because he was more sensitive than usual to such things, he was quick to notice the woman's expression of distaste and the way she shrank slightly away.
   "Haf no alarm, madame," he told her in his thick German English. "Mein own wife from Australia wass!"
   Lettice Robinson crimsoned. She had not meant to hurt his feelings. It was just that he was so—so ugly. "Oh, I'm so sorry!" she exclaimed, trying to make amends, but only floundering. "I mean—this cruel war! Where is she now?"
   "She is in Tsingtao, madame," he said. "When we left, she wass there. Now I haf no way to know."
   "Oh!" Lettice Robinson's hand touched her lips. "I am sorry!"
   But Voss had already turned away toward the Captain. Obviously it was a thing he did not care to discuss. "Herr Kapitan," he said, "Kapitan von Mueller says that he regrets he must you detain. But he says also that no harm will come to you or your family. Obey signals and what you are told do. He will see that you are safe."
   Harry Robinson lifted his lip sardonically. "Thank you," he replied. "Wot else'd I do, Leftenant?"
   Voss looked at Lauterbach blankly. The accent was entirely different from the Australian English Trudy had taught him.
   Lauterbach chuckled. "Good enough, Rudi," he said in German. "They understand! Now, if vou'll bring your men around to relieve mine for a bit, I'll take you topside and explain things. After that we can spell one another on the bridge."
   When they were above once more, in the chartroom, Lauterbach put his hand on his companion's arm. "Cheer up, Rudi. The war can't last forever."
   "Thanks, Conrad." Voss looked grim. "That's true. But forgive me for reminding you, neither can we!"
   "At least it's an even race," said Lauterbach.
   After they had finished, Lauterbach went down to the officers' saloon in search of some breakfast. Sleepy though he was, he was even more hungry. The English steward apparently entertained some scruples about serving their German captors—"giving aid an' comfort to the enemy," he called it—and even the ship's officers preferred to remain aloof, which was perfectly acceptable to Lauterbach. In like circumstances he would do the same. But the Captain's wife was there when he entered.
   "Oh, 'ullo there, Captain," she greeted him. Apparently she had reconciled herself to the situation. "Can I get you something? A dish of tea, maybe—or some beer? Our coffee's not much, you know. 'Ow about some crumpets and kippers— and a bit of cheese, per'aps? All you Dutchies like cheese for breakfast, I've 'eard."
   "No, thank you, Mrs. Robinson," said Lauterbach. "Cheese is for your true Dutchmen—Hollanders. I am German. But I will take some of that tea, and toast or a crumpet with marmalade or jam—and if you have it, a little bacon?"
   "Of course!" she replied. "It's all ready. 'Ere! Sit down at the table. I'll fetch it for you."
   "Thank you," he said when she brought it from the galley. "You see, we're not so outlandish, after all. We're just men— sometimes hungry, always tired. What did you think of our Leutnant Voss?" He could not have said what imp had produced him to ask the question.
   "Leftenant—Oh, 'im!" she replied with a grimace. "Isn't 'e ugly, though? Fair gave me a turn, 'e did, when 'e first come on board."
   "He's no beauty," Lauterbach smiled, "but he has a great, good heart. You need fear no harm from him."
   "Poor chap!" she exclaimed. "I do 'ope I didn't 'urt 'is feelings any."
   "Hurt his feelings?" Lauterbach cocked one eyebrow at her as he lifted his steaming cup.
   "Yes," she said. "Remindin' 'im of 'is wife, and all."
   "You may believe it or not, Mrs. Robinson," he laughed, "but Frau Voss is a singularly beautiful girl."
   "You're not serious!" She put down her teacup incredulously. "You don't mean it!"
   "But I do!" he assured her.
   "Then why—" She checked herself. "It's none of my business, of course!"
   "But you are curious?"
   "Not really, you know." She flushed slightly. "But you can tell 'e loves 'er. I could see that in 'is eves."
   "He does." Lauterbach nodded. "He idolizes her—far more than she deserves. But who are we to criticize? I wish I could tell you that his feeling for her was returned, but I'm afraid that would not be true. Perhaps by now she has come to appreciate his real worth, but in the beginning I think she was influenced by the fact that her life in Sydney was not especially happy—"
   "It must've been ruddy awful for 'er to marry someone that looks like 'im to get away from it!"
   "It probably was"—Lauterbach nodded again—"though, of course, the fact that he is also one of the wealthiest men in the world might have had something to do with it."
   She gajjed at him. "Now you are 'avin' me on!" she exclaimed.
   "I'm not. I give you my word, Mrs. Robinson."
   "Then wot—Then why—" she sputtered.
   "Is he here?" he offered.
   "Yes, why?" she insisted. " 'E's got a wife 'e loves. 'E's got money enough to get out of 'arms way and let both of 'em live safe and easy. Now wot's 'e doing off 'ere in this godforsaken corner of the world, 'olding up poor pinchpenny traders who are only trying to make an 'onest livin'? Is 'e that greedy?"
   Lauterbach held up his hand. "Just a moment, Mrs. Robinson!" he protested. "Let's be fair. You know as well as I do that greed has nothing to do with it. So far as this ship is concerned, he could buy a dozen like it out of petty cash and not even miss it! It just happens that being born to wealth, he wanted to make more of his life than just a round of tennis and polo and society. Because he was serious about such things, he entered the Navy and accepted what came his way without hope or expectancy of favor. When war came between your country and ours, he might have exerted his influence to avoid dangerous service. But like a good officer and an honest gentleman, he chose to scorn his advantage, and where his ship was ordered he went. He did not ask for the duty. He did not refuse it when the orders came. He accepted what came his way. You cannot criticize him for that."
   "No-o-o," Mrs. Robinson conceded. "So far as that goes, I daresay you're right. But 'is wife, Captain Lauterbach! Wot about 'er? Wouldn't you think 'e'd stay back for 'er sake?"
   "Do you think so?" Lauterbach smiled cryptically. "Wasn't it one of your own English poets who said, 'I could not love thee, dear, so much, Lov'd I not honour more?'"
   "AAaar!" Lettice Robinson snorted. "That's—"
   Lauterbach waved his finger at her. "That is the attitude of many men in your own Army and Navy. It was behind your husband's remark to you yesterday when he snarled at you. We are men, too, fighting for our Fatherland; obeying the orders we receive—thinking always of those who have been left on shore, worrying for their safety and still concerned for their grief if harm comes to us! Leutnant Voss is only one of hundreds so troubled in the Emden alone. Multiply his anxiety by that of all the rest, in the fleet and in the armies, and you will have some notion that we, too, are not just animals; we, too, have more than just a distant bit of land at stake."
   The Captain's wife looked almost as though she might dispute the point. "That's all true, I daresay," she replied. "But 'ow about you, Captain?"
   "Me?" Lauterbach was startled. "What do you mean, Madame. I am an orphan—and a bachelor! What happens to me is of concern to no one."
   "Ah, come now! There must be someone!"
   "Not a single living soul!" Lauterbach assured her cheerfully. "And I consider myself lucky."
   Nevertheless, when he finally turned in he could not help thinking of Caroline Grey, and wondering where she was and how she fared. All the problems, certainly, had not been left behind!
   All that day and through the night that followed, the Emden and her companions steamed at dead slow speed, virtually hove to, maintaining only enough forward movement to keep steerageway. For the first twelve hours or so of the gale they bore generally east by north, heading out into the Bay of Bengal, away from the main steamer tracks out of Calcutta. When dusk fell. Captain von Mueller reversed the procedure and bore back again, west by north, toward the coast of India.
   This was not exactly as he would have planned it, but that was a matter beyond his control. Since they could not transfer their prisoners until the gale abated, it was wise to stand wide of possible observation by any casual passers-by. Such a motley collection of shipping as they now had under their wing, especially when shepherded by an unidentified man-of-war, would be certain to result in an alarm and the possible loss of all their gains. Moreover, the men could do with a bit of rest, especially if, as he surmised, the wind and seas abated during the night. Tomorrow was Sunday, but unless he was wrong there would be little time for its observance. Very well, then! Let them take today for the Sabbath, and tomorrow there would be work enough for all.
   He was quite right, as it proved. Toward sunset the wind began to fall, and by midnight the skies had cleared and the stars and the moon were out. By dawn even the long swell had spent itself, and the sun rose above a copper-burnished sea on which the ships rode scarcely moving, the thin smoke vapor rising from their funnels almost straight into the air.
   "It's going to be hot," commented von Muecke.
   "It is!" von Mueller agreed. "All the more reason for getting started early."
   "What's the program?"
   "We'll have to sink the Killin" replied the Captain, thinking aloud.
   "And let all that coal go?" von Muecke protested.
   "What choice have we?" von Mueller shrugged. "The coal in the Greek is of the same quality, and there is more of it. We cannot sink the Greek without becoming liable to the Greek Government for the value of the ship, and possibly for damages as well—to say nothing of the risk of stirring up yet another small hornet's nest. At the same time, we cannot release her, since the coal she carries is consigned to the Indian Government, and it is our duty to see that it does not fall into their hands. We have not time to jettison. Hence we must keepthe Fontoporros afloat until we have time to transfer her cargo to our own bunkers. Killin, on the other hand, is an English ship with an Indian cargo. We can, and should, sink both together."
   "I suppose you're right." Von Muecke looked unhappy. "But it seems a shame."
   "If we had a place to transship it," von Mueller replied, "we would but we can't risk coaling operations here. She'll have to go. Never mind, Helmuth! There will be others."
   "I hope so!" replied von .Muecke fervently.
   That set the pattern. The boats of both Killin and Kabinga were put to use, unloading the former. All of her stores and as much of her water as possible were first carried over, after which the entire crew was removed and she was combed for anything of value to the Emden. She was then left to the demolition crew; the charges were set well below water line and sea cocks opened.
   She sank promptly at ten in the morning.
   Aboard the Kabinga, Lettice Robinson shivered as she and her husband and Lauterbach and Voss watched.
   "Wot's the matter with you?" her husband growled.
   "Such a waste! Oh, why such a waste?" she whispered.
   Lauterbach glanced at Rudi Voss. "Her crew are all on board here, are they not, Herr Leutnant?"
   "Ja, Herr Kapitan!" Voss replied.
   "And all such supplies as they may need?"
   "Ja," Voss repeated.
   "Then there is no more that we can do here," Lauterbach said. "As you see, my recall is signaled. You will take charge here, Leutnant Voss, until further orders." He turned abruptly to Captain and Mrs. Robinson. "I'm sorry we've been such an inconvenience, but at least you have your ship and your cargo. Just follow Leutnant Voss's orders, and you will find that everything will work out all right in the end."
   As he shook hands with Captain Robinson, the Englishman looked more cheerful. "It's 'ard lines, being stopped at all," he said. "But since it 'ad to be, I must say, I'm as well pleased it was by gentlemen like yourselves."
   "Thank you for your kindness, Mr. Lauterbach," his wife added. "We'll not soon forget it. I 'ope the Lord'll keep watch over you."
   Back aboard the Emden, Lauterbach went directly to the conning tower to report the completion of his mission.
   Von Mueller nodded when he was finished. "Very tactfully done, Conrad," he remarked. "I hope you had an opportunity for some rest while you were there."
   "More than I have here," Lauterbach replied. "In fact, after Rudi came over yesterday we were able to take turn and turn about at it. Why?"
   Von Mueller looked away toward the northern horizon. "Because unless I miss my guess," he said, "we'll have more work of the same sort before long."
   Lauterbach followed the direction of his gaze. Seeming to spring from the sea itself, at the very edge where sky and water met, a tall column of smoke thrust like a bony finger into the sultry air. The source was vet far out of sight, but there was no doubt that it was a steamship. Moreover, it was equally evident that she was headed in their direction.
   "It could be a warship," Lauterbach commented.
   "It could be," von Mueller agreed. "In any case, we shall have to deal with her—and that means more work for you."
   "I'm not worn out, if that's what you mean!" Lauterbach retorted.
   "I only wanted to be sure," von Mueller replied. "Was everything under control on the Kabinga? Voss has matters securely in hand?"
   "Thoroughly," Lauterbach replied. "And Klopper is ferrying over the prisoners from the Markomannia."
   "We'd best halt that for the time being," von Mueller mused. "If you please, Mr. Schall, by flag signal: To the Markomannia, 'Suspend all operations for the present.' To all ships: 'Stand by. Be prepared to disperse on signal. Observe wire silence.' "
   The other ships responded promptly, acknowledging receipt of the message. The Emden came up in a sharp quarter circle.
   Von Mueller nodded to the officer of the watch. "Very good, Herr Schall," he said. "Now let's have full ahead."
   The engine-room telegraph jangled, and the Emden seemed to squat on her haunches for an instant before leaping forward under the full thrust of her powerful screws.
   At nearly thirty knots the distance between the two ships diminished rapidly. Within a quarter of an hour they could make out the stranger's masts and superstructure.
   "Another merchantman," Lauterbach remarked. A slight note of disappointment crept into his voice in spite of himself.
   "Soon enough! Soon enough, Conrad, we'll catch a Tartan and be forced to fight for our living." Von Mueller grinned. "In the meantime this is pure duty—to harass and disrupt the enemy's shipping to such an extent that he is obliged to divert a large part of his naval force to protect his sea lanes. As long as we can do that, we will keep him on the defensive."
   The stranger proved to be the British S/S Diplomat, 7615 tons, from Calcutta for Liverpool with ten thousand tons of tea. Her crew was removed to the Kabinga, and the sinking party went to work. She was settling rapidly when yet another smoke was sighted, bearing up from the south and east.
   "This is becoming monotonous!" Lauterbach grumbled as he stared glumly at the distant wispy column.
   "I can think of pleasanter duties," von Muecke agreed.
   If he heard them Captain von Mueller gave no sign.
   The new stranger made no attempt to avoid them, probably because her Captain knew that he had already been sighted and that his own top speed could not possibly match theirs. She turned out to be only a medium-sized, bumbling ocean tramp, with rust-streaked sides and peeling paint. Indeed, the only things extraordinary about her at first glance were the wireless she carried—not a usual piece of equipment in vessels of her class at that date—and her single, tall, spindling funnel, which seemed recently to have received a fresh coat of dark green paint topped by a broad band of red.
   At sight of her wireless Captain von Mueller promptly alerted von Guerard to stand by to intercept any alarm that she might try to broadcast. At the same time, he sent Leutnants von Levetzow and von Hohenzollern across with a boarding party to examine her papers and tend to her quick disposal should she prove to be English. Lauterbach pretended to be much distressed, but in spite of his play-acting it was evident to all that he was, on the contrary, rather relieved.
   This time, however, Conrad Lauterbach might have enjoyed his chore.
   Hans von Levetzow, the Emden's second gunnery officer, was first up the ladder. Franz von Hohenzollern was close at his heels. Behind them the boarding party followed quickly. But instead of the usual gathering of ship's officers, headed by the Captain, they found themselves confronted only by a single, swarty, curly-haired, and barefooted seaman in a dirty singlet and dirtier breeches.
   "Wait here!" Von Levetzow started toward the bridge.
   But the dark-faced seaman barred the way. "Spettate! Spettate qui!" he cried.
   "What the devil is he saying?" von Levetzow asked.
   Franz shook his head. "Don't look at me! It sounds like Italian, but I don't speak it."
   Von Levetzow angrily turned back to the sailor. "Where is your Captain? . , . Kapitan! . . . Kapotan?"
   The man looked puzzled for an instant, then seemed to catch at least one word's sense. "Ah, Capitano!" He almost smiled. "Si, si! Momento!'' He went on into a flood of explanations that meant exactly nothing to Franz or von Levetzow.
   "Never mind all that," von Levetzow snapped in German. "Either take us to your Captain now or tell him that we demand to see him here immediately."
   "Non capisco!" said the man sullenly.
   "Blode Kerl!" Von Levetzow was livid. "Are we to stand by to be insulted by this stinking tramp?" He turned and beckoned to the armed marines by the rail. "Achtung!" he began.
   "Wait a minute, Hans!" von Hohenzollern interposed quickly. "Let's not be hasty. If I am right, this is an Italian ship, and Italy is still neutral—"
   "Are you trying to say that you are awed by that?" von Levetzow snarled at him.
   "Not at all," said von Hohenzollern. "But I hardly wish to incur the Emperor's wrath. I have a feeling that the government would scarcely look kindly on any complications touched off by us in such a petty matter." "Petty—" Von Levetzow was still angry. Fortunately, their attention was diverted by a loud and furious burst of voluble Italian. They both turned to see a hugely fat little man, splendid in his holiday-best blue and gold uniform—putting it on had obviously been the cause of his delay since it was plainly uncomfortably tight—rolling down the deck toward them at a jiggling half trot. Behind him came a group of other sailors in varying stages of uniform dress, evidently his officers.
   "Ah, so you are here at last!" von Levetzow exclaimed. "We have been waiting for you!"
   The Italian Captain looked blank, spread his hands, and launched again into Latin apologies and explanations.
   Von Levetzow shook his head and broke in impatiently. "I don't understand any of that. I am Oberleumant von Levetzow, and this is Leutnant von Hohenzollern, of His Imperial Majesty's cruiser Emden. What ship is this?"
   The Italian looked blank. "No capisco'' he said, spreading his hands.
   "Zum Teufel!" Von Levetzow glanced at his companion. "He speaks no German. We speak no Italian. What are we to do in such a situation?"
   "Let me try," von Hohenzollern said, and turned to the Italian. "Do you speak English? Parlez Francais?"
   The portly Captain's eyes lighted. "Francais?" he cried. ''Oui! Oui! Un petit peur''
   From that point on it was comparatively simple. The ship was the Loredano, of Genoa. The Captain's name was Ragone. They were bound for Calcutta, Rangoon, and Singapore; their cargo was entirely Italian, for Italian firms in those cities. Their papers were in order. There was no reason to detain them.
   On the personal side, however, it was a more delicate matter. It appeared that Captain Ragone's feelings had been severely damaged. He particularly resented being stopped, and he made it quite clear that he had no sympathy for Germany.
   The information was relayed to the Emden. There was a long, awkward pause.
   "Tre bien!" said Captain Ragone, the Italian, impatiently at length. "2z/f, flutte, crotte et merde! You have all the particulars. You have seen my credentials. Do you not leave? Am I not to be permitted to go on my way?"
   "If you please, Captain." Von Hohenzollern tried to be placating. "Your papers are quite in order, and you will be permitted to proceed presently. However, we must await our own instructions first."
   "I shall complain to my consul!" the Italian snorted.
   He was interrupted by the winking signal from the Emden's bridge:
   Loredano continue on original course north by east. Emden will accompany as far as convoy. Party will remain on board until recalled.
   Franz read the message—with some surprise and no little concern. What in the world did the Old Man have up his sleeve? Whatever it might be, he was certain the Italian would not like it. Diffidently he translated.
   "What?" Ragone shrieked. He went off into a long, sputtering streak of staccato Italian; then seeing the blank looks on the Germans' faces, switched to French, in which he was a little more comprehensible. "What? Am I to sneak along with you like a prisoner? Jesus, Maria, and all the Saints! I have shown you that I am a neutral. I will not put up with it."
   "Gently! Gently, Kapitan Ragone," Franz von Hohenzollern soothed. "Of course you are neutral, and of course you will be free to go presently. But my guess is that Kapitan von Mueller has some favor to ask of you before you leave and he wants to be moving back toward the convoy as he prepares his message."
   "Pah!" the Italian snorted. "What could he ask of me? Anything I might do would constitute unneutral service and make me liable to detention by the English."
   "I doubt if he has anything like that in mind, Captain." .^2?'■^P.^^^ ''— he cited the case of the Pontoporros.
   T ylS- ^°'" *^ ^'■^^^ ^° ^^'"^ abut—not me," said the Italian. His cargo was contraband. Mine is not."
   "I can only suggest that you wait and see," replied von Hohenzollern. "Whatever it is, I assure you th Captain von Mueller will not ask you to do anything contrary to the law."
   "Hmmmph!" Ragone growled. "What choice have I?" He turned on his heel and strutted, with as much dignity as his corpulence would allow, forward toward the bridge ladder. ''Go with him," von Levetzow said wearily. "You'll be at hand then to give him messages from the Emden. I'll stay here with the men."
   But no further word came from the cruiser until nearly dark, when they had joined the other ships. Then the Emden's blinker flashed:
   Request Loredano to convey British prisoners to Calcutta. Emden will supply necessary provisions and we draft on German Government to cover cost of passage.
   Hohenzollern translated. Captain Ragone exploded. 'Why? Why should I do this for him? For whom? For accursed Germans? No! Definitely not! I will do no favors for you! That is my last word!"
   Hohenzollern shrugged and turned back to the wine of the bridge to signal:
   Italian Captain refuses suggestion. Stand by.
   He turned back to Ragone. Already the dusk was closing in. Captain Ragone," he argued, "if you will consider for a moment, you will see that what Captain von Mueller asks is no favor to him. On the contrary, he is asking you to act in behalf of the English."
   "How can you say that?" Ragone demanded. "He made them prisoners to begin with, didn't he?" "Yes—but we are at war with England, and that was his duty, just as it is the duty of every English naval officer to capture any Germans he can. You are at war with neither of us, so you are at liberty to act as a go-between. In this case you would be helping these Englishmen by restoring them to their home."
   "Bah!" the Italian retorted. "He has put himself in this situation. Now let him find his own way out."
   The night darkened.
   "You still do not see my point," Franz argued. "Consider: Suppose we were to turn these Englishmen adrift in open boats, as we could do. Suppose then that you were the first vessel to come upon them adrift. Would you stop and pick them up, or would you pass them by simply because they had had the misfortune to fall into our hands?"
   "What do you think me?" Ragone bristled angrily. "A savage? I would pick them up, of course!"
   "And convey them to the nearest port—without any thought of recompense?" Franz grinned.
   "Naturally!"
   "Then where is the difference?" von Hohenzollern demanded. "In this case you would be picking up these unfortunates exactly as if they were adrift, but without the inconvenience of the open boats. What's more, you would be furnished with all provisions necessary for their subsistence, and would receive payment for their passage."
   Ragone opened his mouth to reply, then seemed all at once to comprehend. His mouth closed. His eyes narrowed "How much?" he demanded.
   Von Hohenzollern thought swiftly. "We are not more than two days from Calcutta. It will cost you nothing in supplies, and with only a few exceptions your passengers will be earned on deck. I think Captain von Mueller would agree to ten Marks per day per passenger."
   "|And how many 'are there?" Ragone demanded.
   "About three hundred—more or less."
   "I should be paid fifty Marks each for such a service." The Italian looked calculating.
   "That's ridiculous!" Von Hohenzollern was shocked. "However, if those are your terms, I will report them to Captain von Mueller."
   "He may take them or leave them!"
   On the bridge of the Emden, von Mueller and von Muecke spelled out the message as it was blinked across to them. Von Muecke cursed. Von Mueller laughed, a short, sharp bark.
   "Very well, Helmuth," von Mueller said drily. "You see how right I was? Our Italian friend has no intention of playing the good Samaritan! Thank him for his offer, but decline it. Say that I consider it dangerous and impractical to attempt to transship the prisoners in the night. Recall boarders and inform Loredano he may continue his voyage." Aboard the Italian vessel Franz von Hohenzollern translated the message as it flashed across. "There you are, Captain Ragone," he said. "That solves the problem to your satisfaction, I am sure. Now as soon as we have gone, you will be free to continue your voyage."
   He saluted and slid quickly down the ladder to the main deck below. Ragone stared after him for a moment in incredulous surprise. Then with a sudden start he hurried down as quickly as his stubby legs would permit. The German marines were already dropping to the waiting boat overside.
   "Momento, momento, signore! " he begged. "Please! Perhaps I spoke with too much haste! I will take them for forty Marks—thiny!"
   Von Hohenzollern shook his head. "I'm sorry, Captain—" he began.
   "Twenty! I will accept your offer!"
   "You heard the message," Franz reminded him. "Captain von Mueller has changed his mind. He does not wish to transfer the prisoners in the dark—and he has given us our orders. Good night, Captain Ragone."
   Ragone looked baffled and angry. "So he has changed his mind? By what right? By what right, I ask you, does he delay my voyage? I will protest—"
   "When you get ashore, Captain," von Hohenzollern said coldly, "you may protest all you like—to your own consul. In the meantime may I remind you of the international law that you are so fond of quoting? It is a breach of neutrality for any neutral to reveal to any belligerent the position of another belligerent. I trust you are prepared to observe this?" The Captain looked startled at von Hohenzollern's tone.
   "t^^^l ^!h.^^'''^ "'^'■'"^ *^o"&gt;^ ^H be summoned back on board. Sinore, believe me!" he cried. "On my honor, I would not dream of such a thing!"
   "On your honor?"
   "On my honor, Sinore Tenente! My honor! My word!" "Bon voyage, then," replied von Hohenzollern. "And remember!"
   "What was all that about?" Von Levetzow demanded.
   Franz von Hohenzollern watched the lights of the Loredana recede as he explained.
   "Believe what you like," said von Levetzow. "I don't trust him."
   "No more do I," replied von Hohenzollern, "but he'll be well out of reach before he dares broadcast our position."
   On board the Emden, Kapitan von Mueller made it clear that he shared their view. "He'll spread the alarm, no doubt about that," he said. "We'll stand to the south'rd so long as his lights are in sight, then come about and hang in his tracks. In that way we can intercept his signals and jam them if he attempts to broadcast our position."
   "I don't think he'll try that, Kapitan," said von Hohenzollern, ''with regard for his own skin."
   "You may be right, Franz," the Captain chuckled. "But this IS war and we cannot take a chance. He'll bear watching. Once he reaches Calcutta, there will be no doubt about his reporting us. These waters will be too hot to stay in."
   Their precautions, however, proved unnecessary. Apparently von Hohenzollern's estimate of Captain Ragone was correct. The Emden's wireless operators stood by through the night, but no sound came from the Loredano.
   The next day, the sea was calm, with long, gentle swells, and von Mueller went about the job of transferring the rest of the prisoners. Conrad Lauterbach was ferried across to the Kabinga in the launch together with Marine Oberzahlmeister Woychokowsky and Zahlmeister Applikant Bordeaux, the ship's clerk accountant, while the other boats headed for the Markomannia. As they climbed aboard, Lauterbach was agreeably surprised at his different reception. The child, Alfred, no longer howled at sight of him. The Captain's wife wished him good morning cheerfully, and offered a cup of tea.
   Even Captain Robinson was almost affable. "I 'ope your skipper's 'ad no change of 'eart," he said anxiously as the Germans came on board.
   "None," Lauterbach assured him. "The rest of the prisoners are to be shifted and some formalities attended. After that you'll be free to go on—or at least back—to Calcutta."
   "Formalities?" Robinson raised his eyebrows.
   "Nothing you'll find troublesome," Lauterbach assured him. "They'll take time, that's all."
   And they did take time. Each prisoner—and that included all on board the Kabinga as well as those brought over from the Markomannia and the Emden —had to be certified a due prisoner of war. On such-and-such a date he had been captured. The name of his employer was given. Such were his wages. Such should he have received on completion of his voyage. All were acknowledged by the accounting team from the Emden, and an appropriate certificate was given back to cover his period of imprisonment and the wages due him for the time he was in captivity. If such time exceeded that for which he had signed articles, then the German Government bound itself, under international law, responsible. The same agreement bound the English and the French. Von Mueller had no reason to believe that it was not being as meticulously observed elsewhere.
   The work of passing the prisoners across from the German ships to the Kabinga took longer than Lauterbach had anticipated. It was early afternoon before he was ready to go back to the Emden.
   At the rail he turned to the Robinsons. "Good luck, madame!" he said to the woman.
   "And to you, too, Captain."
   He glanced at the small boy. "And you, Alfred," he added, "you don't know how lucky you are to be so young. By the time you are grown, this war will be over. There should be no other in your life."
   Alfie started to smile, then thought better of it and stuck out his tongue instead.
   "Alfie! It's no matter wot we think, we've still got some manners!" his mother rebuked him.
   "Don't blame him, madame," Lauterbach interrupted. "He's only doing what he thinks right." He turned to Captain Robinson. "Here is your new passenger list, Captain, and your certificate of cartel. Under it you will not be molested again. Good luck."
   They shook hands, and Lauterbach dropped over the side, sliding down the rope ladder to the waiting boat below. Faces came to the Kabinga's rail, first a few and then many, until her whole midships and upper works were lined. Halfway across to the Emden, Lauterbach waved. A few waves replied, then another, and then a dozen more, until it seemed as if all their former captives were waving and cheering.
   When the Kabinga was nearly out of sight, Leutnant von Guerard appeared from the wireless room. "Intercepted message broadcast by the Calcutta lightship, Herr Kapitan!" he said.
   Von Mueller accepted the flimsy, read it grimly, then passed it across to von Muecke.
   REPORTED BY ITALIAN S/S LOREDANO AN HOUR AGO, GERMAN CRUISER EMDEN HAS SUNK THE BRITISH S/S DIPLOMAT AND KABINGA AND GREEK S/S PONTOPORROS AT LAT. 18:1 N, LONG. 86:24 E. ALL VESSELS ARE WARNED TO BE ON THE LOOKOUT FOR HER IN THE AREA.
   Helmuth glared at von Mueller indignantly. "Schweinehund!" he exclaimed. "He swore on his honor—his sacred honor!"
   "Are you surprised, Helmuth?" asked von Mueller.
   ''Yes—but by all rights he should be our ally," von Muecke protested. He referred, of course, to the Italo-German treaty of alliance. "He might at least have had the decency to remain neutral."
   "Does it matter so much now, in any case, Helmuth?" Von Mueller shrugged. "Save that the fool's dishonor has actually worked to our advantage?"
   "Our advantage?" Von Muecke gaped at him. "Certainly." Von Mueller nodded. "By giving out this information so soon he has given us the best chance we could wish to escape whatever trap the English might try to set for us. Now, while the English are getting ready to cast their nets for us here, we will be on our way elsewhere."
   "Jawohl, Herr Kapitan," von Muecke said gravely. "These are dangerous waters. I am afraid our usefulness is ended here."
   "Dangerous, yes, Helmuth," said von Mueller. "But as to our usefulness, I have my own ideas."
   Von Muecke glanced at him sharply. In his own good time, he knew, the Captain would tell what he had in mind. When he did, the junior knew it would be something audacious—something unanticipated.
   But von Mueller himself had really no exact idea of what they should try next by way of attack. There was no doubt in his mind that their best move, if they were to carry out the duty expected of them, lay in the strategy of surprise; they must strike and strike and strike again, as hard and as suddenly and as unpredictably as they could where they were least expected. How or where that might be, he did not yet know for sure, yet instinctively he recognized that it would be a mistake to reveal his thoughts even to his most trusted officers. His plans would not be betrayed, but all hands would be kept more on the qui vive if there were some mystery in his movements. For the time being it might be wise to let them sit and wonder.
   In the meantime ship's housekeeping had to be tended to, willy-nilly. Wednesday came up with brilliant weather, and under such conditions, von Mueller decided, it would be folly to postpone further the coaling that was imperative. Accordingly, Fontoporros was summoned forward and made fast and the transfer of the Greek's cargo began. It was slow, hot, dirty work that frayed nerves and tried tempers. In twelve hours, broken only by a brief rest at midday, when the heat became unbearable, they were able to transship only 440 tons. The operation ended two hours short of midnight, when the Pontoporros was cast off and sent, under guard, to a rendezvous at some vague future date off Simalur—a rendezvous which was destined never to be kept. But the Emden had been able to replenish her bunkers and deck stores. She now had coal enough to continue her cruise for a time; coal that at least would burn and maintain a full head of steam, whatever Chief Engineer Ellenbroek and his assistant, Haas, might think of it.
   As the Pontoporros bore away southward, the Emden herself bore up in a more easterly direction for the Preparis North Channel and the junction of the Madras—Rangoon and Singapore—Calcutta traffic lanes. Everyone on board had high hopes of flushing out more game along those heavily traveled and as yet untouched routes. But when the dawn came the seas were empty, and not even so much as a smudge appeared on the horizon. Throughout the day they prowled the area, without success.
   "Have they all been warned away?" demanded von Muecke in the cool dusk of the evening.
   "It's possible," von Mueller admitted, "though we've intercepted no broadcasts to that effect."
   "In the morning, then, maybe?" von Muecke said hopefully.
   Von Mueller shook his head. "Our greatest value lies incur mobility, Helmuth. It is also our greatest advantage. When we stop too long in any one place, we risk losing them both. As soon as it's dark, we'll run on through the North Channel and then bear southeast to cut across the Singapore—Rangoon line."
   Von Muecke's eyes glinted. They might catch nothing; still, the prospect of activity was more to his taste than lying in wait.
   The passage of the channel presented no difficulties. The chatter of British warships could be heard on the wireless, but apparently none had thought yet to seal off that passage. They were all too far away even to be considered as potential threats. By dawn the Emden was well clear and into the burnished waters of the Andaman Sea.
   143
   Through another hot, still, lazy day they steamed slowly, first southeast, and then as they came near the track of Singapore ships, south-southeast. Not until late afternoon, however, did they raise even so much as a smudge on the horizon. Then it was so faint that they could not be sure that it was not simply a wisp of haze. Yet it was a possibility and it bore almost dead ahead. They dashed toward it.
   There was a steamer, surely enough, bearing northward for Rangoon. But when they brought her to, she proved to be the Norwegian S/S Dovre.
   "Another neutral!" Von Muecke's tone of disgust echoed the general sentiment on board.
   But Karl von Mueller was far from dissatisfied. He had already made up his mind as to their next move, and an enemy ship would have encumbered the Emden with another load of prisoners. After requesting several newspapers, he quietly sent the Norwegian on her way.
   So long as it remained light, those who were off duty went eagerly to work on the papers. All of them were starved for news, for most of what they had heard since leaving Tsingtao had come to them in the briefest possible radio communiques, and any enlargement was welcome, no matter how highly it might be colored by their adversaries' point of view.
   Indeed, they found many of the items highly diverting. There was a measure of fury and bitterness, to be sure, in the endless accounts of German atrocities. How could even the dullest Englishmen, they wondered, believe such palpable lies? Yet it was obvious that the accounts were taken seriously in London. At the same time, however, there was much satisfaction to be derived from the fact that the German armies were advancing everywhere, and that the English themselves seemed to admit that they were powerless to halt them. It was amusing also to read the lurid and grossly exaggerated accounts of their own activities in the Indian Ocean. Any idiot should be able to see that if they had done only one tenth of the nefarious deeds with which they were credited they would have had to have a flying machine for a ship. The vessel had yet to be launched that could appear at so many and such far-flung places in such swift succession.
   There were other items of interest or amusement. One of the papers, a Sunday edition out of Hong Kong, carried a very detailed background story on the commerce raider telling not only where and when she had been built, how long she had been stationed in the East, and her armor, armament, and complement, but also giving brief sketches and even some photographs of Karl von Mueller and his officers. Of Kapitanleutnant Helmuth von Muecke, for instance, it reported that at the outbreak of hostilities he had been betrothed to an Englishwoman, though it did not mention her by name.
   Von Muecke gasped when he saw that. "How could they know? I was not even certain of it myself!"
   "In that case you were the only one on board who was not!" said von Mueller.
   "But—but how? " von Muecke persisted.
   "She probably told them herself," von Mueller replied. "After all, it is quite likely that she went on to Hong Kong from Shanghai. It would be a more likely place to find a ship for home."
   "Ummm," von Muecke agreed absently. His attention was on the article. "Well, wherever they got their information, they haven't missed much. Here's quite a long bit about Rudi and Trudi. And it says here that Use and her mother arrived safely in Hawaii more than a month ago."
   Lange looked almost as pleased as if he had received a letter from the girl, but Rudi Voss seemed disturbed.
   They pushed on slowly west-northwest, not exactly retracing their former course, but running almost parallel with it, some fifty or sixty miles distant. At the same time, because once again the weather was perfect for the purpose, von Mueller availed himself of the opportunity to refuel at sea, this time from the Markomannia, with good Shantung coal, much to the engineers' delight. Thus with bunkers filled once more, they all felt fit and ready for whatever task they might be called upon to tackle.
   Well below their former course through the North Channel von Mueller hauled about due westward and ordered speed for a darkened midnight dash through the Preparis South Channel, back once more into the Bay of Bengal.
   Their eastward passage, a few nights before, had been ridiculously easy. The return, however, was not so uneventful.
   They had scarcely entered the channel when von Guerard appeared on the darkened bridge.
   "Herr Kapitan?" he asked.
   Von Mueller's dim figure detached itself from the group at the end of the starboard wing. "Here, Anton," he said.
   "Herr Kapitan, we are intercepting messages from an English heavy cruiser. I think she is the Hampshire—at least she is using her code letters."
   "Where away, Leutnant?" von Mueller asked sharply.
   "I cannot say exactly, Kapitan," replied von Guerard. There were no direction finders in those early days of the war, and in the dark, narrow waters of the channel it was out of the question to swing the ship sufficiently to affect the strength of the incoming signals—the only means that they had of obtaining an approximate fix. "I should guess that she was in the North Channel. She is talking mostly with Rangoon."
   "Probably looking for us," said the Captain dryly. "The Mattheisson's people have reached port by now and had time to give the alarm. How far distant, Leutnant? Can you tell?"
   "From the strength of her signals I would say she is not more than ten sea miles away."
   "The chase grows warm, eh? Kapitanleutnant von Muecke! Full war watches, and have all hands alerted immediately to stand by for action stations. This ship is big and fast and more heavily armed than we are. If we meet her in these narrow waters, we'll have our hands full."
   "Jawohl, Herr Kapitan!"
   The hours that followed were filled with the tension of waiting, and even, von Mueller sensed, with a certain hope. If they met the Hampshire, everyone on board knew, they would be hopelessly outclassed. Yet such was the eagerness of the men for some action other than the dismal, grim routine of boarding and sinking undefended merchantmen that they welcomed any fight, no matter how great the odds against them. They went eagerly to their posts and stood by alertly, wakefully throughout the night; of them all Karl von Mueller was probably the only one who hoped to avoid a meeting.
   As it happened, he need not have worried. For a time as the Emden and the Markomannia ghosted westward, the Englishman's wireless signals seemed to grow ominously loud. To the men hovering over the German keys it was an almost irresistible temptation to reach out and send a defiant challenge hurtling through the night. But the Captain's orders were strict. At all costs they must maintain absolute radio silence, and discipline was such that no man dared to disobey. Toward morning, as they passed from the narrow waters of the channel into the broad, open reaches of the Bay of Bengal and turned west by south, the signals began to grow fainter and yet more faint, as though the Hampshire were bearing northwest toward Calcutta, or even eastward toward Rangoon. In any case, whichever course she followed, the distance between them was increasing, and by dawn the full war watches were belayed and the alert secured. By midday the signals were far away, and by nightfall they had ceased.
   The Emden and the Mark were alone on an empty ocean.
   The day following was a bright, sunny Sunday, without alarms and without labor, affording a welcome respite for all hands. But the crack of dawn on Monday brought them tumbling from their bunks and hammocks and sent them scurrying to battle stations. Not until they had obeyed that drilled-in habit did it even occur to them that there was anything out of the ordinary about the summons.
   Then Bootsmannsmaat Max Busch, in charge of the number-three gun of the second starboard forward battery, put tongue to the general surprise: "Zum Teufel!" he muttered. "There is nothing. Nothing but ocean and porpoises!"
   His answer came almost as though he had been heard on the bridge above. The communications buzzer sounded.
   "Stand by, all hands," said the sharp voice of the officer of the watch. "Captain's inspection!"
   The hours that followed showed plainly that this was no "spit-and-polish" routine. Rather it was a working survey of the ship's battle efficiency. It could not be otherwise. After her weeks at sea and her frequent refuelings, with loose coal heaped in improvised bunkers on the forward deck, and livestock in equally hastily knocked-together pens aft, no captain in his right mind could expect to find in the Emden her customary peacetime spotlessness, and von Mueller was far from fastidious. Neither he nor his accompanying staff— von Muecke, Gaede, Gropius, Witthoeft, von Hohenzollern—wore white gloves. Nor did they search for infinitesimal matters, such as the thin film of coal dust that still coated the underside of the steam-pipe covers. Rather they looked with a critical eye at the weapons and disposition of the ammunition, and roundly rated one seaman-passer whose hoist was not fully loaded, and a gunner whose breech block did not gleam brightly enough. At the moment, it was clear, their interest was not in the shape of the ship, but in her fighting trim.
   When it was done, von Mueller called all hands to muster forward, where he could address them from the bridge. When they were gathered, he leaned on the dodger and smiled down at them.
   "You look as though you were anxious for action," he said. "Jawohl, Herr Kapitan!" came the response from the massed men on the deck below,
   "Give us something to put our teeth into!" yelled someone bolder than the rest.
   Von Mueller's smile froze. "You will have it," he replied. "Will the man who said that raise his hand?" There was a moment's hesitation. Then Bootsmaan Herman Gromke stepped forward and raised his hand. Von Mueller's eye was icy. "You are tired of this nonsense, Bootsmaan?"
   Gromke swallowed. He knew he should have had enough sense to keep quiet. But he had spoken, and now he stood committed for them all. "Ja, Herr Kapitan—" he floundered. "But—"
   "But!" von Mueller thundered. "So am I, Bootsmaan! So am I! But you know that this is not the time or the place to volunteer your opinion. I will overlook it in view of what I have to say to you all. Tomorrow night, with luck, I hope to give you action of a different sort—" He paused while the foredeck rang with cheers. When they had died down, he continued. "I cannot promise you any stunning victory. I can promise you a surprise for the enemy. How they will meet it depends entirely on them. In the meantime, as you know, I have this morning made a very thorough inspection of the ship and her readiness. A few things I have found wrong. You know what they are. I expect you to correct them before tomorrow midday. If any gun crew or element of this machine is not ready by that time, there will be no action. If everything is ready, as it should be, we will attack Madras as soon after nightfall as possible. That is all!"
   He turned away and looked at the officers grouped behind him. "I will meet you gentlemen in the wardroom at sixteen hundred and see that you are briefed. Meantime, give your attention to whatever deficiencies may exist in your various departments. I shall expect a readiness report from each of you."
   The officers' meeting later that afternoon was less perfunctory.
   "Well, gentlemen," said von Mueller, spreading a large map on the table, "you now know our objective—Madras. We cannot, of course—and we should not—aim to destroy the city, or even aim to hit it. Our objectives must be, first, the tanks and installations of the Burma and Anglo-Indian Oil companies, at the northern side of the city here, from which both enemy warships and her most modern freighters can refuel; second, the shipping in the roadstead, which may include one or more enemy warships; third, any defenses, lights, beacons, or wireless relay stations they may maintain there. Your fire will be directed in that order, and I expect hits within the target areas. You will, of course,have the various batteries and units under your command in full battle order. If you have any doubts about them, I want you to inform me fully. The entire outcome of the attack may depend upon the readiness of any single one of you. Am I understood?"
   There was a moment's quiet.
   "Jawohl, Herr Kapitan!" said von Muecke at length.
   "Good!" said von Mueller. "Any questions?"
   Again silence. Then:
   "Herr Kapitan!" Gaede spoke. As gunnery officer he was most concerned. "We cannot know what ships may be in port, of course. But what of the shore defenses?"
   "Our information is hardly up to date, Dirk." Von Mueller looked at him. "But at last reports the only defenses were a number of old 5.9-inch guns at the Saint George battery— on the beach in the middle of the town. The only others will be temporary batteries set up on the mole, or possible armed vessels in the harbor. Naturally, we cannot know the weight of those. We will just have to risk them."
   Von Mueller recognized another hand. "Leutnant von Hohenzollern?"
   "Herr Kapitan," said Franz, "will we need torpedoes?"
   "Unless we encounter guard ships outside the roads, Leutnant," von Mueller said, "I doubt it. However, I expect you to be at your post and ready."
   The night passed slowly, fitfully, for them all. But the morning found them within striking distance of the Indian coast, though yet well out of sight. Since it would not do to arrive off Madras before nightfall, they hove to and fell to transferring all items of cumbersome or dangerous nature to the Markomannia. Near dusk the Mark dipped her colors in good-luck salute and steamed away toward the rendezvous appointed for the next morning. When she was gone, all hands were turned out on deck and ordered to bathe and put on fresh clothing; standard practice in the tropics, where a dirty piece of cotton singlet shredded in a gunshot wound might mean death for a seaman. Gangrene was swift in that climate.
   At dusk von Muecke's false funnel was hoisted into place so that if she were seen in silhouette the Emden might not be immediately recognized. An hour later the oscillating flash of Madras Light came into view on the horizon and the men were sent to battle stations. Tension ran high.
   "Zum Teufel!" Von Muecke glanced at von Mueller in the reflected glow of the binnacle. "They are confident!"
   Von Mueller chuckled. "No doubt they believe we would not dare attack them here in their own yard, so to speak. The better for us. Call the engine room, Kapitanleutnant, and be sure we are all clear for full speed!"
   "Aye, aye, sir!" von Muecke replied, and a moment later, "Engine room reports all clear, Herr Kapitan. Steam on all boilers."
   "Thank you, Helmuth! Come as close within range as possible without being observed. We will approach in total darkness. No lights of any sort until they are ordered—then only as they are ordered. I want that made fully clear."
   "Jawohl, Herr Kapitan!"
   Aft, in the torpedo flat, Franz von Hohenzollern reported readiness to Kurt Witthoeft. Then since the Captain himself had said it was unlikely that the torpedoes would be needed, he turned temporary command of the flat over to Chief Torpedoman Fritz Toler and clambered up on deck to join his friend Hans von Levetzow at the after battery. From that position, if it were necessary, he could whisk down into his station in the wink of an eye. In the meantime he could see the action. Strictly speaking, it was a serious breach of discipline. But it was a temptation that von Hohenzollern could not resist.
   It was full dark when he came on deck, and not only the lighthouse at the end of the mole was clearly visible. All around the harbor, for a distance of nearly fifteen miles, the shore and harbor lights burned like a string of fireflies on a chain, while in the center, behind them, the whole city itself seemed a sea of glowing light. Against it a number of ships in the harbor—none apparently warships—the mole itself, and even the massed oil tanks on shore, to the north of the city, stood out in plain relief.
   As Franz slipped into the after battery, von Levetzow glanced around. "Franz! Zum Teufel! You are supposed to be down below. What are you doing here?"
   "Don't be stuffy, Hans! The Old Man said there'd probably be no need for us. If there is, I can be down in a second."
   Von Levetzow shrugged. "It's your hide."
   The Emden pressed in more swiftly now, using the lights on the mole and inshore to line up the battery and oil tanks. By 10 P.M. they were in position, about three thousand yards offshore. Von Mueller gave the order. "Port your helm, Herr von Muecke! Bring the starboard batteries, fore and aft, to bear."
   "Jawohl, Herr Kapitan!"
   The ship began to swing.
   "Searchlights!" commanded von Mueller.
   Twin fingers of dazzling light jabbed through the darkness to pinpoint the battery and oil tanks.
   "Open fire!"
   The Emden seemed to lift from the water under the shock of that first salvo. Aboard they could hear the scream of the shells as they streaked inland. An explosion or two burst amid the oil tanks, but the rest seemed to fall far beyond.
   "Too high!" Dirk Gaede snapped into his communications phone. "All batteries, trim sights, down ten!"
   "Down ten—down ten!" came the responses.
   "Fire!"
   This time the hits were clean. Fires blossomed. Two shells burst on the mole and one on board a ship lying alongside. A few seemed to take effect in the battery.
   In the after battery von Levetzow remarked to von Hohenzollern, "We caught them napping that time, but they'll be aroused by now. Once they open up with the shore battery, it won't be so easy. They have 5.9's there."
   "Fire at will!" commanded the speaker in his ear.
   "Fire at will," he repeated. "Jawohl!"
   He was too busy for conversation after that. Shell after shell lobbed out and found its mark ashore, yet strangely enough, the English battery did not reply. Only once did a gun fire in their direction, and then they could not be sure where it was located. Von Hohenzollern thought he saw a winking flash near the end of the mole. An instant later a white geyser of water spurted skyward a hundred yards short of their position. No doubt the gunners had been blinded by the dazzling glare of their searchlights.
   Then all at once it was over, only a moment or two, it seemed to von Hohenzollern, from the time it began.
   "Cease fire!"
   He was conscious of a sense of disappointment as the guns stilled and the ship ceased its spasmodic jerking and shuddering. It seemed to him that they had fired only a dozen times, and he was astounded to learn later that more than a hundred and twenty-five rounds had been flung ashore. The searchlights flickered out. There was no need for them now since all of the oil tanks on shore were blazing merrily, the westerly wind rolling the thick black billows out in their direction. String by string the onshore lights were going out as startled operators remembered to pull the switches. Underfoot the Emden trembled, then began to pulse and throb to the powerful beat of her engines. With her helm hard aport she swung in a tight half circle, bringing her portside to bear and heading north toward the edge of the rolling smoke. Instantly, on signal from the bridge, every light on board was switched on, and for a dozen minutes she stood out, plainly visible to all on shore, making no secret of her course. Then she plunged into the dense screen of smoke.
   "Perfect!" von Mueller exclaimed. "We could not have done it better!"
   For fully half an hour they stood northward at top speed, with all lights showing. Then at last, when they were well out of sight of the land, every light was extinguished and they came about once more on a southeasterly course, to flit away in the darkness.
   As they did so, von Guerard appeared again on the bridge. "Message intercepted from the Hampshire, Herr Kapitan," he said. "She gives her position as off Puri and reports she is turning southwest towards Madras at top speed in anticipation of intercepting us."
   "I expected that." Von Mueller smiled back almost triumphantly. "By the time she reaches Madras, we'll be far, far away!"
   All through the night the glow of the fires reddened the skies behind them, and all through the following day a towering pillar of smoke rose from beyond the horizon. Toward midday they rejoined the Markomannia. Two days later they slipped into the steamer track between Colombo and Singapore, only a few miles to the south and east of Ceylon.

   IV
   MONSOON SEAS
   October 1914
   Ceylon hangs like a teardrop off the southeastern coast of India, a scant thirty-one miles distant from the Indian mainland, with her base in the Indian Ocean and her northern tip in the Bay of Bengal. For the most part her coastal plains are low and fairly level, and at some points heavily jungled. But in the interior, never very far back from the sea, her mountains rise to more than eight thousand feet and on a clear day are visible from a great distance, hanging; like hazy blue banks of cloud against the tropic sky, while the rest of the land lies hidden well below the watery rim of the ocean's horizon. Colombo is Ceylon's principal port, and but for Colombo the island would be little more than a backwash in a busy world.
   Situated as it is, however, the port of Colombo is one of the world's major crossroads. The greater part of the traffic between Europe and the Orient passes this way. Ships from England, France, and the Mediterranean, through Suez and the Red Sea, find it a convenient stopping place on their way east to Malaya, the East Indies, China, and Japan. By the same token ships from the East, often even from Australia and the other lands down under, on their way to European ports make it a convenient way station. Even traffic from the east to the west of India; from Calcutta to Bombay and Karachi, and vice versa, must pass its doorstep.
   As a result even in wartime its waters swarm with shipping of all nations. As a result, too, it is a center of naval activity—an Admiralty' headquarters in the area.
   These facts were well known to Karl von Mueller. But the risks the Emden ran were worth the stakes in his estimation. Besides, the morale of both his officers and men ran high after the swift strike at Madras. Champagne toasts had been exchanged in the wardroom, and young von Hohenzollern, perhaps under their influence, had even gone so far as to promise Chief Engineer Ellenbroek a shipload of the best Cardiff coal within a week or six boxes of the best Dutch Sumatra cigars, of which Ellenbroek was particularly fond.
   The chief, of course, had been complaining, after the fashion of all engineers, of the quality of the coal they were using. But at least he had been sporting enough to promise von Hohenzollern three cases of fine Bavarian beer if the coal was forthcoming, so making it a wager and a sporting proposition in whose outcome all took a lively interest.
   They were twenty miles offshore, directly in the line of Colombo—Penang—Singapore, and within sight of the mountaintops, if not the shore—certainly well within the properly patrolled area of the British fleet—when they made their first capture. Twenty-four hours had passed since the wager, and Franz had only six more days.
   The ship was the S/S King Lud, Suez to Calcutta. She yielded good stores of meal and potatoes and other odd items, but she carried no coal. Her crew was transferred to the Mark, and she was sunk.
   A few hours later they overtook a lighted tanker, which proved to be Norwegian. They merely spoke and released her with a cryptic "Good voyage." Their next interception, a good thirty miles from the regular route, heaved to with almost evident petulance.
   She was the British S/S Tyrneric, with some four thousand tons of sugar for London, and she gave them the first— and indeed the only—unpleasantness of all their captives. Lauterbach and Franz von Hohenzollern went on board with the Emden's boarding party, and were met by the first mate with a nearly empty bottle in his hand.
   "You may sink us," he snarled, "you bloody Hun, but I'll have a warm belly on the way down!"
   "Don't play the martyr, mister!" Lauterbach retorted. "All you'll get from this will be heartburn. Where's your Captain?"
   The Captain was in his cabin. Apparently he, too, had taken refuge in the bottle. "What do you want?" he demanded belligerently. "Bloody Admiralty! They told me this would be a safe route!"
   Without warning he snatched the bottle from his desk and flung it at Lauterbach's head. Lauterbach twisted slightly to one side, and the bottle smashed against the bulkhead.
   "Captain!" Lauterbach barked. "I understand your feeling. But do you consider this fitting? You are in command of this ship, I take it?"
   "I'm in command, an' I'll stay in command, you bloody, baby-killing Boche!" the man swore. "Damned Admiralty! Swore there was nothing in the way, the dirty bastards!"
   "There probably wasn't when they told you that." Lauterbach smiled grimly. "I doubt if they are aware of it even now. It is our duty to be where we're least looked for. Now, will you give the order to abandon ship? You and your men will be put on board the Markomannia and released as soon as possible. I can give you half an hour."
   "I'll be damned if I will!" the English Captain snarled. "We'll go down with the ship first!"
   "I'm sorry, Captain," Lauterbach told him, "but I'll remind you that you are a prisoner of war and have no choice in the matter."
   "The Admiralty assured me—" the Captain began. "Oh, shut up!" said Lauterbach, and turned to von Hohenzollern, who entered the cabin at that moment with the chief engineer in tow. "Is the black gang out?"
   "All clear below, Herr Oberleutnant," Franz replied smartly. "The men seem to recognize the futility of resistance, but I'm afraid the chief shares the same romantic notions as the Captain."
   "I am sorry, gentlemen," said Lauterbach irritably. "I regret what must be done, but there will be no mock heroics here. Your ship will be sunk, and you will be made prisoners—in irons if necessary. Franz, see that they pack their own belongings and lower them away to the boats. When that is done, have the demolition crew set their charges, and stand by to open the sea cocks!"
   Even then the matter was not so simply settled. Had they been at all co-operative, Lauterbach would have allowed them to follow the Emden until the next day, when the transshipment of officers and crew and all personal belongings could have been carried out thoroughly. As it was, both the Captain and the chief engineer refused to pack and carry their own gear to the waiting boats. As a consequence both officers had to be manhandled into the launch with only such small possessions as Franz von Hohenzollern could fish from their cabins and stuff into a convenient laundry bag. The two were then removed to the brig on board the cruiser, while the rest of the crew was transferred to the Mark. In the meantime Lauterbach, by blinker, requested and received permission to sink the vessel at once. Long before midnight it was done, and the Emden had resumed her stealthy prowl westward.
   In the shuttered, curtained wardroom, from which no light could leak, the off-duty officers chuckled over newspapers, seized aboard the Tyrneric, which were full of accounts— from the English point of view, of course—of the Emden's raid on Madras. Casualties had been remarkably light, owing, as the Emden's people well hoped, to the fact that the city had not been shelled indiscriminately. Their fire had been concentrated on strategic targets. But the damage was estimated at more than twenty million Marks, and what was even more important, insurance rates had soared as a result, while refugee trains out of the city had been packed to the rooftops with panic-stricken residents.
   While von Mueller was still pondering the account, they overtook the British steamer Gryfevale, from Aden for Colombo. Since she was without cargo, she suited von Mueller's purpose well, for there was plenty' of room in her empty cabins for all his prisoners. Accordingly, he placed Lauterbach in command and ordered him to follow the Emden until such time as she could be released.
   For a time matters went quietly. Shortly after dawn they passed a large Dutch ship at a considerable distance, but since they had already learned her identity through intercepted wireless messages they did not molest her. Later that afternoon, while their prisoners were being transferred to the Gryfevale, they overheard, with some satisfaction, a wireless conversation between a British warship and the Dutch wayfarer.
   Have you seen anything of the German raider Emden? asked the Englishman.
   There was a long pause. Then the Dutchman replied:
   For reasons of neutrality answer refused.
   Aboard the Emden they were jubilant. "There is a neutral who knows how to play the game!" remarked von Muecke.
   "I wonder if she did see us," Bunte Lange said.
   "She could hardly miss three ships in company," von Hohenzollern put in.
   "What about that, Anton?" demanded von Levetzow. "What do you think?"
   Von Guerard shrugged. "I'm hanged if I could tell," he replied. "She left me as much in the dark as the Englishman."
   "Well, whether she saw us or not," said von Muecke, "she did us a decent turn. I don't suppose we'll ever know the answer. But we can still be grateful."
   As the days slipped past, Franz von Hohenzollern was beginning to grow apprehensive. Cigars were expensive. Already the week was more than half gone. He had made his boast to Chief Ellenbroek on the twenty-third, and as he came to his watch on the bridge one midnight he realized it was already the twenty-seventh—and Sunday at that! What, he asked himself disgustedly, could be expected on such a day? He made his entries in the log, noting their course, speed, and position, together with the disposition of the other ships, then took to pacing, first out one wing of the bridge, then restlessly out the other. He had made that solitary patrol perhaps a half a dozen times when all at once the buzzer in the wheelhouse rang.
   "Bridge!" he answered. "Von Hohenzollern."
   The lookout's voice came over the wire. "Vessel with all lights burning bright, bearing two points on the starboard bow, course due east. I can't be sure, Herr Leutnant, but it looks to me as though there were another ship trailing her without lights."
   "So?" said Franz. This sounded interesting. "What distance do you make it?"
   "About six or seven miles, Herr Leutnant."
   "Good! Report any change to me promptly."
   "Jawohl, Herr Leutnant!"
   Franz hung up and rang the Captain's cabin. "I'll be right up," said von Mueller, and his promptness was evidence of his concern.
   Quietly all hands were summoned once more from their beds and sent to their battle stations, where they stood tense and waiting as the Emden crept slowly in the direction of the stranger.
   The other ship's lights were the first to appear, and von Mueller and his aides on the bridge studied her carefully through their night glasses. There was no question about the ship herself. She at least was real and quite evidently a merchantman. But trailing her at a distance was another, shadowy, almost formless mass. Von Mueller voiced the thoughts of all as he lowered his glasses.
   "The lighted ship could be a decoy." he said. "The other— if it is another—could be a warship hoping to draw us into a trap."
   "At least they'll not take us by surprise," von Hohenzollern remarked.
   Von Mueller nodded approvingly. There had been no hint of apprehension in the younger man's voice, only a sort of veiled eagerness, as if he might welcome the adventure. Von Mueller knew that ever)' man on board would echo the sentiment.
   But as it turned out, the dark mass trailing behind the stranger was only a dense cloud of her own smoke, which by a freak of the wind and the obscuring darkness had assumed the shape of another ship.
   As If to make up for the disappointment the real vessel proved to be the British collier S S buresk, 3450 tons, out of Cardiff for Hong Kong with 6600 tons of the best Welsh coal! Von Hohenzollern whooped when he heard the news, and went at once to inform Chief Ellenbroek that he owed him three cases of beer.
   The capture, however, was more than just a sporting event. It was important because it released the Markomannia to certain other essential duties long since overdue.
   Von Mueller explained his plans the following morning in the wardroom. Kapitanleutnant Klopper, with the nucleus of his crew and the marine Kommandos. together with the bulk of the supplies, oil and water carried by the Mark, would be transferred to the buresk. The Arab stokers of the latter would be retained, but all the rest, together with the prisoners from the Tyrneric and King Lud, would be transferred to the Gryfevale, which would then be sent into port under cartel. In the meantime such coal as remained in the Mark would be transferred to the Emden, after which their old comrade would be released to make her way to the most convenient neutral port, probably in the Dutch East Indies, where she would mail letters home for all hands in the cruiser—cheers that shook the ship!—and buy such supplies as she could for the Emden. She would then meet the Fontoporros, take on the rest of her coal, and rendezvous with the Emden once more, south of Sumatra.
   He concluded with a broad smile, and there was no doubt that the program he proposed met with everyone's approval. It would no doubt meet with even heartier approval from the crew when they were told of it, for everyone on board had some tie on shore whose mere memory had been nagging at him. This might provide an opportunity, if not to be back with them once more, at least to let them know that they were still alive and safe!
   Although the departure of the Gryfevale was delayed by the capture and sinking of two more British ships, toward midnight she was released and sent away to Colombo—and once again the Emden's crew knew the strange satisfaction of being cheered by their enemies.
   At least it was something to know that these men, whom they had been forced to take, recognized the Emden's obligations and acknowledged the fair treatment given them. There was something heart-warming in that. They blinked out "Thank you, and good voyage" by way of farewell, and slipped away in the darkness.
   When the Gryfevale was finally gone, the Emden and her companions turned their bows toward the lower Maldives. There in the quiet, unfrequented waters, well to the southward of Male, the Markomannia was brought alongside the Emden and the work of transferring her remaining coal reserves begun. At the same time, the Buresk was brought up and made fast to the other side of the Mark and the transshipment of oil, water, livestock, and other supplies broached. Even as this was being done, both officers and men were excused from work by groups in rotation in order that they might write such letters as they wished to send home.
   Naturally, all of the mail had to be rigidly censored, and Kapitanleutnant von Braun was assigned to read the officers', while Franz von Hohenzollern, von Guerard, Schall and Lange were responsible for that of the crew.
   The task was a tedious though not a difficult one. In the case of the officers' letters it was merely a matter of routine, since the officers themselves were already well aware of what they could and could not say. But the men's letters were a different matter. They were sometimes crude, frequently misspelled, and often almost illegible. All of them were poignant with longing for home and shore, and some were almost pathetically funny. Herman Schultz, for instance, described the birth of the kittens in terms that were methodically—and ludicrously—serious, causing the censors to rock with laughter. But in between the lines each one could read the big cook's concern for Hilde's safety in Tsingtao and his desperate yearning to be there with her to share her danger. An oiler with neither kith nor kin, nor even a true sweetheart, wrote to his favorite Hamburg whore that he dreamed at night of her white belly and her professionally adept caresses. A youngster in the port watch told his mother that he had learned to sew, but not as well as she; and that while the food on the Emden was good, the cooking could not compare with hers. All spoke in general terms of their exploits, and each expressed a hope for more of the sort of action they had anticipated at the outbreak of the war. But all also recognized the need for the sort of work they had been doing, and took a decent pride in doing it well. None criticized or complained, and all praised their officers and expressed the hope that the war would soon end in victory for the Fatherland, with an early return home for them all.
   Lange, as the junior officer, drew the task of tying the letters up in their regulation mail sack before delivery to the Markomannia. "I wonder how many of these will ever be read," he said almost bitterly.
   "I wouldn't care to bet on it," von Hohenzollern replied. It was midafternoon of the following day before the Emden's bunkers were filled and all the spare stores and supplies of oil, water, and foods moved to the Buresk. Zahlmeister Applikant Bordeaux was sent to the Mark with a fat purse and instructions to attend the business of buying at some neutral port—preferably Dutch, since they seemed the most meticulous in observing the rules of neutrality. Klopper and his men were transferred to the Buresk, and late in the afternoon, as the sun dipped behind the tall palms of the atolls, the three ships cast off from one another. The Markomannia dipped her flag and bore around, hard to port, cutting straight for the underside of the East Indies. Emden also dipped her flag. So did the Buresk.
   As long as they were on the horizon, Karl von Mueller watched them through his glasses. They were almost gone from sight when von Muecke spoke at his elbow.
   "Will they get through?" the exec asked, not so much posing a question to the Captain as voicing his own thoughts.
   Von Mueller turned slowly. "We can hope. And we can try. Herr Kapitanleutnant, the ship needs scraping, painting, and repairs—at least such as we can give it. The waters to the north are too dangerous to attempt anything of the sort at this time. But to the south we may find a moment of quiet. Bear south a quarter west. I think I know a safe place.''
   The Chagos Archipelago lies far to the south of India; far to the southward of the Maldive Islands, well below the equator, and almost in the middle of the vast Indian Ocean. Though the islands' closest neighbor is probably the Seychelles group, about fourteen hundred miles to the westward, they are officially administered by Mauritius, some fifteen hundred miles or more to the southwest, with whom in 1914 only desultory and usually unpredictable communications were maintained. Since they lay well off the track of any regular steamer lanes, they were almost completely isolated and as a rule visited only three or four times a year by an official mail and supply schooner. Most of the group were uninhabited and uninhabitable. A few, however, supported coconut plantations which exported a small amount of palm oil and copra. One, Diego Garcia, boasted as snug a harbor as any to be found in those seas, and was the seat of the local administrator, a Frenchman from Madagascar, who also doubled as the manager of the island plantations.
   It was in the direction of this island that von Mueller turned after the departure of the Markomannia. Since there was much to be done that could be accomplished at sea without risking discovery at the island, they cruised very slowly while the entire crew turned to, both below decks and aloft, to put everything in good order and make both vessels as shipshape as possible so that their stop at the island might be brief.
   The work progressed slowly but inexorably in the nine days in which they flirted south. By luck the weather held good and the sea was calm, though the days were almost unbearably hot. They crossed the equator, but owing to the urgency of the moment, von Mueller postponed the usual ceremonies at the line. Little by little the Emden began to look respectable again, though one would scarcely refer to her as the "Swan of the East" yet. Then the day came—on Sunday, which was enough to alert everyone—when all hands were mustered aft and Kapitan von Mueller spoke to them.
   "Men!" he said. "You have worked hard and well during this last fortnight, and I want to compliment you all on what you have done to put our Little Old Lady back into proper shape. Now, however, we have two tasks remaining that cannot conveniently be done at sea. First, we must refuel from the Buresk. I know that is not impossible at sea. But it can be done more quickly and efficiently in harbor. Second, the Emden's bottom is foul and must be cleaned. That is impossible at sea. To do a proper job of it we should go into dry dock, but you all know what chance we have of that. Consequently we must do the best we can with such facilities as are available. We must find some sheltered harbor where we can careen ship as far as possible without too much fear of being disturbed in the operation."
   When he paused, the men stirred uneasily and glanced at one another curiously. Most of them scarcely knew the meaning of the word, and those few old hands who did were aware only that it was a measure that had been successfully employed on the old wooden ships in windjammer days. They had never heard of it being applied to a modem man-of-war, or even a rusty old tramp steamer.
   Von Mueller cleared his throat and went on. "That will be a very considerable task, I realize—especially since it must be done as swiftly as is humanly possible. Tomorrow we will have our chance to prove to the world that it can be done. Tomorrow we will come to anchor in the bay of Diego Garcia, God willing. There the conditions should be ideal for our purpose."
   A little ripple of pleasure ran through the assembled crew at the thought of stretching their legs ashore. But von Mueller held up his hand.
   "Just a moment!" he cautioned, "I appreciate your eagerness to step on land once more, I understand your feeling in regard to the work we have so far been called upon to do— and I cannot say to you that we will not be called upon to do more of the same. However, I give you my word that the sort of action we all hoped for when we became part of His Majesty's Navy will be forthcoming if we do our part If we shirk such drudgery as lies behind—and still faces us—then we may never be more than we have been. I think our luck lies in our own acceptance of what we are called upon to do. 'Fortune favors the brave,' it is said, and bravery is not alone counted in deeds of spectacular daring. Bravery is a willingness to face oblivion; to die unknown—for what we believe to be right. Hoch! Der Kaiser!"
   "Hoch! . . . Hoch! . . . Hoch!"
   They responded, but the response was a formal one. They were clearly suspicious. Small beads of sweat stood out on von Mueller's upper lip. He must make them understand!
   "Tomorrow we will steam into Diego Garcia at sunrise. So far as we know, there is no wireless communication between these islands and India or Mauritius. In fact, their only communication with the outside world is by sea. We do not know, however, what news they may have received since the outbreak of war. We do not know what installations the British may have set up—for these islands are British. Therefore we'll approach with caution. Action stations will be called at dawn, and I will expect every man to be prepared for any resistance that may be offered. However, if—and it is entirely possible—we meet with no resistance, we will offer none. We will make use of the harbor. We will do our work in the bay. But we will keep our distance as courteously as if peace existed. There is work for us to do, and—let me again remind you that these are enemy waters—there will be no shore leave: I repeat no shore leave!"
   He could sense the growl of disappointment that ran through his audience, and nodded sharply. "I understand, lads!" he said. "'When the work is done, we'll all have fun: But first we have to live that long!' If we're to do what's ex-
   ............
   There was a moment of silence. Then the voice of Bootsmann Mueller spoke from the crowded deck below. "We understand, Herr Kapitan! You may depend upon us"
   "Thank you, Mueller," replied the Captain. "Now get all
   .......
   The hot red rim of the sun slid up over the edge of a molten sea into a sticky tropical day.... The ,-.U li^ht chased he shadows of the night away to the west L JcL7Z, If its low ^r "nt 'n'"'.' ^'^" ^'^ P"^P'^ ^'^f- -^ fo'd Its lungT ' ' "'"^ '*^' ^^'P ^"^ multishaded green of
   Not until then did the alarm gongs sound through the lenn fhedeT"' TV^' P'^ "^ ^"P^-^^^^^ ^"-^^-^ whisper oer One h '"^ ^i'"'".;^' '^^^^^^' ^'^^'^"^^h the passageways
   S.rl.Vh''"' '"^ '^^^'^&gt;' '^' ^^^^^^1°ffi-^^^ in change reported their stations: ^-
   "Number-one battery—ready!" "Number-two battery—ready!" "Port and starboard blisters—ready'"
   h.v^?' l^'^^'V^P^^^ flat-engine room-boilers-sick bay—wireless—all ready'"
   "Very Good ^"^"^\"«'^^^^ '- the officer of the watch. Very good, Kapitanleutnant; you may stand in. Be sure the men understand. This is not a drill!"
   h Jk^ ^'"fu ''"""^ '^"^ ^'^"^ ^°^^^^ the sun and pointed her battered bows toward the opening in the outer reef^
   rhr K'" u"^'"^ '^"^'^ ^'^'^ ^^^ f« be expected. They slid in through a channel where the water was so clear that the leadsman in the chains was hardly needed. Inside the reef they bore through a wide lane marked by red and green painted oil drums-much cheaper than regulation buoys but as serviceable-to the opening of the main channel into the lagoon, circled by the embracing arms of the island.
   As they slipped into the channel the tension mounted, for who could tell what preparations had been made to receive
   tlf ^'TX^""'^^' ^'''' ^^^" ''' ^« ^°--^ the channel be may mined. Other guns might have been placed around the bay, ready to counter such an invasion. Silently the English might have built a minor base here with a sufficiently powerful wireless to reach Mauritius and Australasian channels. But no sound of transmission had been intercepted.
   Yet the silence did not mean necessarily that there was none. They continued to stand tense and alert.
   But no shots came. On either side the narrowing shores of the winding channel grew dark as a tunnel for a moment, then opened to a dusky, misty passage through which they could see a passage winding to a strand of dawnlit water and a palm-rimmed basin.
   The shadows faded under the simmering sun. The dusk vanished ashore, and the shade of the green palms grew inviting, but there was still no sign of what to expect.
   Von Muecke swept the quiet shore line with his glasses once more, then turned to von Mueller. "We'd have heard from them by now if they had anything to say."
   "I think you're right," von Mueller replied. "Swing up in a half circle. We'll come to anchor at the opposite side of the bay from the landing. Signal Buresk to set up her booms and open hatches and prepare for coaling. Have the men stand by to careen."
   They came up and around. Emden's anchor splashed into six fathoms of glass-clear water so handsomely that the men on the fo'c'sle head could see the swirls of sand as it struck bottom, and watched the multicolored fish darting around it. As ordered, Buresk came in to moor nearby and began to make ready for the work to come. Still the green palms and the long white curve of beach showed no sign of life. Not until nearly noon did a white longboat put out from the long, thin pier and come crawling across to them. The plantation manager, a lean Anglo-Frenchman from Madagascar, in crumpled whites, who spoke only French, was followed on board by his affable Singhalese assistant, whose broad English was comparatively good, but whose comprehension of the tongue was far less exact. Both, however, managed to understand the iced whisky and soda served to them in the wardroom.
   "Messieurs!" cried the manager. "It is so seldom that we are honored by visitors, except for the schooner from Mauritius! Never in my memory have we had the pleasure to welcome a foreign man-of-war! Do you remember such a thing, George?"
   The assistant looked blank. The manager repeated his question in a clucking tongue. George's face brightened. "Ah! Never!" he replied, and lifted his glass. "Who wins at Wimple?"
   Von Mueller looked blankly at von Muecke. Von Hohenzollern came to the rescue. "Oh! You mean Wimbledon?" he cried. "We haven't heard the results yet, but at last reports the Japs and the Australians were leading the field. Do you play?"
   The assistant spread his hands and looked resigned.
   "Tennis?" the manager said in his island French. "But no! This is long since settled here. The turnip and the tomato are more wholesome. Our tennis court is a garden, and now there is nothing but the hammock. We have not even the wireless to tell us what is happening in the world outside— eh, George?"
   Von Mueller had the vital information that they wanted— and that without hurting anyone. The island was still out of touch with the world. They could not broadcast an alarm. And in fact, it began to look as if they were unaware that beyond their doorstep was a world at war.
   The man's next words confirmed the suspicion. "Only three or four times in the year does the government schooner from Mauritius stop here," he said. "And we have not seen her since early in July. In fact, she should be coming any day now. It would be a fine feather for its to give then some news for a change!"
   "Indeed it would," said von Mueller gravely, and glanced at his fellow officers. "Had you heard that Pope Pius X is dead?"
   "Oh, no! This is news indeed!" cried the manager. "But what about yourselves? You have not told me what brings you here."
   Von Mueller looked almost doubtful. "You will not spread the word?" he said.
   "The word?" the manager looked startled.
   "The word." Von Mueller nodded. "You see, the principal navies of the world, British and French and German and Italian, Austrian, and even the Americans, have all recently been taking part in sort of joint maneuvers—war games, they are called—throughout the world. Our own theater of operations has been the Indian Ocean. A few days ago, far south of here, we met with a terrific typhoon that damaged us— well, as you can see. We had no choice except to put into some harbor. But any regular port in this part of the world is hostile to our side of the same, so that we would be forced to surrender and allow ourselves to become idle. Here we are safe from such restrictions, can put our own house in order, and then put out again—perhaps to capture or, figuratively, of course, sink some of the other team."
   The manager looked wise. Clearly he would be only too happy to have a hand in any such game—since it was only a game. "Mum's the word!" he assured von Mueller. "I hope you and your people will honor us for a feast on shore. We don't often have the opportunity to spread it down for guests!"
   Von Mueller shook his head regretfully. This time, at least, he had no need to pretend or dissemble. "I am sorry" he replied. "We are still on active duty, you know, and to all intents and purposes, on an actual war footing. I am afraid we cannot take time out for sociability. We will have to work the clock around and then put back to sea as quickly as we can."
   The manager sighed, but shrugged resignedly. "Well, perhaps some other time." Then he brightened as a thought came to him. "But, ?}wn Capitaine, perhaps there is one small favor you can do for me."
   "If it is within my power," said von Mueller. The manager beamed with both inspiration and relief. "Ah, that is good of you! You see, I have here a small motor launch that I use for my official visits. It is a good boat, but my island boys are so clumsy that it has broken down, and there is no mechanic among us. I am sure that the matter is nothing serious. It is just that we do not know what is wrong. For two months now I have had to do without it, and I would appreciate it if one of your engineers or machinists or someone would see what can be done."
   Von Mueller smiled with relief. "Of course! If it can be fixed, it will be done."
   The visit ended on that amiable note. The manager and his assistant were effusive in their leave-taking and almost ludicrously grateful when Mashinistmaat Kluge and several of the Emden's launch crew were ordered ashore to effect such repairs as were possible on the island boat. Kluge and his companions were only too delighted with the turn of events, and they went weighted down with enough tools for a major overhaul, each with a secret dream of delectable island maidens and possibly an opportunity for a brief romp in the jungle with one before they returned to the ship.
   Alas for both illusions! The launch proved to be in excellent shape save for a matter of minor mechanical adjustment which not even the most diligent gold-bricking could build into an excuse for delay. At the end of an hour they had the engine purring as evenly as Herman's kittens, and there was nothing left but to return to the Emden and resume their work with the coaling, painting, and scraping details. As for the local damsels, those few whom they managed to sight on shore—from the seaward end of the long dock, where they worked on the launch—promptly shattered their most cherished notions. The women of Diego Garcia, it was obvious, would never be noted even for dusky beauty. The fact saddened the sailors, but it did have one beneficial effect. It enabled them to return to the ship with no trace of that reluctance they might otherwise have felt.
   Meantime, the work aboard both the Emden and the Buresk got under way quickly. The cruiser was snubbed short forward on two cables, and several of the forward compartments portside were flooded, so that the ship was given a list that raised her stem in the air and exposed a considerable portion of her bottom. As soon as that was done, all hands save a few who had been assigned to help ready the Buresk for the coaling operations went to work from scaffolds slung over the side. Some scraped away the barnacles, some chipped at rusted spots, and some others painted. At the same time, the ship's divers, of whom there were several, went to work on those parts of the ship's bottom that could not be thus lifted out of the water. Properly it was a dry-dock job, and the bottom should actually have been painted, too. But under the circumstances this was impossible, and all things considered, the men did a remarkably efficient and rapid job.
   Underwater the work went more slowly than it did above. But at least there was only one operation to be done. Above, as each section was finished, the flooded compartments were pumped dry and others flooded, bringing a different section well up, out of the water, and this in turn was quickly tackled, scraped, and painted by swift-working gangs of sailors.
   With more than half the crew working at a time, the entire task was finished as thoroughly as possible by early afternoon. Then as soon as she was righted and riding once more upon an even keel, the anchors were weighed. The Emden was warped in, made fast alongside the Buresk, and coaling commenced. The work went slowly, and though they continued steadily until midnight only some four hundred tons had been transshipped by that hour, when they ceased for the night.
   At dawn they turned to again. It was cooler by several degrees, and even such short rest as they had been able to snatch had refreshed them, so that they were able to work more steadily and swiftly. By midmorning the Emden's thousand-ton capacity was filled, and they were beginning swabbing-down operations when there came a hail from overside. It was George, the Singhalese assistant, in the smoothly purring launch, followed by three large native pirogues heaped high with island produce.
   ''Capitanie, Sahib?" he called.
   "Come aboard," invited von Muecke, and sent word to the Captain that he had a visitor.
   Von Mueller himself greeted the newcomer.
   "Capitanie, Sahib," said the swarthy George in what was obviously a hastily prepared speech, "Spender Sahib, our Manager"—he said it as if it were synonymous with "Our Lord"—"is most grateful to you for repairing the launch. He asks that you accept these few small items of our island's produce in token of his thanks."
   He waved his hand downward toward the waiting pirogues. One was filled to the gunwales with an incredible variety of fish, while the others were piled high with native fruits, and from the cockpit of the launch came the squealing protests of a brace of fine large pigs—for the wardroom, George explained.
   Von Mueller looked at von Muecke questioningly. "Is it proper, do you think, Helmuth?"
   Von Muecke looked doubtful. But George interrupted. "Please, Capitaine, Sahib. If you cannot come ashore to feast with us, then at least we can send you the materials for a feast of your own on board."
   Von Mueller capitulated. "Very well," he replied, speaking slowly and carefully so that the man would understand. "We accept with thinks. But not without return!" He turned to von Muecke. "Helmuth, have Vogel get these supplies on board. Then let him fetch up a case of whisky, two cases of Rhenish wine, and two boxes of our best Havanas for the Governor."
   "Zum Befehl, Kapitan!" von Muecke said almost reluctantly. He was not at all sure that such rarities should be offered in such lavish quantities. But he had no choice.
   When George saw what cargo he was to return, he threw up his hands in delight. "Captahie, Sahib!" he exclaimed. "Spender Sahib will be more than delighted. Indeed, Sahib if you will be here until morning, I will undertake to bring you two boatloads of our delicious lobsters—personally!"
   Franz von Hohenzollern licked his lips and looked hopeful, but von Mueller smiled sorrowfully. "I am afraid that will be impossible, Herr George. I regret it deeply, for my fellow officers and I would welcome such a delicious change in diet, but we have completed our repairs and finished refueling and duty demands that we get to sea again at once. Please convey our regrets to the Governor along with our thanks for his already too-generous contributions."
   They shook hands then, formally, all around, and George dropped back to the waiting launch.
   Once he was gone the ladder was swayed in, and at a signal from von Mueller both anchors came dripping up from the clear depths of the bay. The engine-room telegraph clanged, and the screws began to turn. On board the launch, which still stood by, the natives waved farewell and George dipped the huge English Union Jack, Von Mueller pretended not to see, for after all, he could scarcely dip his own ensign to a known enemy. He did, however, bid them farewell with a series of sharp blasts of the ship's siren, and the Buresk followed suit.
   An hour later the low profile of the island began to drop below the horizon as the two ships, following their regular pattern of deception, stood away to the northwest. Only when the island had disappeared from sight and they were alone on the open ocean did they alter their course and come around toward the northeast.
   The Emden's first objective after the brief pause at Diego Garcia was the shipping lane between Australia and Aden, at the mouth of the Red Sea. Heavy traffic in both troop carriers and meat ships passed that way en route to Suez and Europe, and von Mueller hoped that they might be lucky enough to intercept some of it. But though they patrolled the track for several days, not so much as a smudge of smoke darkened the horizon.
   Where are they? von Muecke wondered almost petulantly. "Do you believe they could have been warned in some way?"
   Von Mueller shook his head. "How could they? We did not know ourselves that we would be coming here until we left the island. It seems to me more likely that we've moved in at a time of inactivity. These things often go in waves, you know, and just now their ships are probably all in port, loading. They may even be preparing to move in convoys, in which case we will have to develop new plans."
   "I hope not," said von Muecke fervently. "The men are growing restless. They're anxious for action."
   "It seems unlikely that they are going to find it here," said von Mueller. "And perhaps they're due for a change—something other than this miserable commerce raiding."
   "You have something in mind?" von Muecke asked.
   "How about Pulo Penang?" von Mueller said.
   Von Muecke's eyes widened with excitement. "Penang!" he exclaimed. "That will be a harder nut to crack than Madras! And what about the French cruisers?"
   "It should be harder than Madras," von Mueller agreed. "But because its defenders believe they are secure it may not be too hard to strike a swift, damaging blow and withdraw before they can recover. As for the Frenchmen, if they are still there they will be at anchor and scarcely expecting us. It will be worth the risk if we can sink one of them."
   "Indeed it will!" Von Muecke's eyes shone. "Wait until the men hear of this!"
   Von Mueller wagged his hand warningly. "Not yet, Helmuth. Wait until I give the word. In the meantime we will continue northward to Minicoy and the Aden-Colombo steamer track before turning eastward toward the Nicobars. That way we may pick up a few more prizes en route."
   In accordance with this plan their course was altered to permit them to sail northward, up the western flank of the Maldives, where they could expect to encounter no other vessels, and where they would have an opportunity to replenish their bunkers. They had sufficient fuel to reach the Nicobar Islands, which lay between the western tip of Sumatra and the Andamans, but to attempt it might leave them dangerously low at the end of that voyage in the event they encountered enemy vessels.
   As their luck had it, the very afternoon when they swung northward, out of the One and a Half Degree Channel, the blustering northeast monsoon came crashing down upon them, bringing with it heavy seas and stormy weather. In India, along the Western Ghats and down the Malabar Coast, that seasonal wind, which generally blows from October to March, is known as the "dry monsoon," since it carries with it little rain. At the southern end of the Maldives, however, it came down across the full sweep of the Bay of Bengal and the Laccadive Sea, and there was nothing dry about it. The rain fell in bucketlike torrents, much to their discomfort. Indeed, the only good thing about it was that it was entirely predictable. It started and stopped each day so precisely that it was almost possible to check the ship's chronometers against it.
   Apart from the raw damp, which after so many days and nights of blistering tropical heat was almost welcome, the greatest drawback was the fact that it interfered with their coaling. It had been von Mueller's plan to refuel at sea, while they were slowly under way, as they had before. But under such conditions it was impossible to bring the Buresk alongside and make fast for the operation. Accordingly, it was necessary to slip in under Miladummadulu Atoll and pause briefly while it was done.
   In the long run, perhaps, it was just as well, for had they been able to refuel at sea it had been von Mueller's intention to turn eastward and head directly for the Nicobars. While they were anchored under the atoll, however, they intercepted a message from an English vessel, eastbound from Aden, inquiring of Colombo as to the safety of the Red Sea-to-Ceylon sea lane. When Colombo answered in the affirmative, the Emden hastily completed her coaling and moved northward. By mid-evening they were in sight of Minicoy— a point which all ships to or from Suez and the Red Sea for Ceylon and Far Eastern ports must pass. Before midnight they intercepted their first prize: S/S Clan Grant, out of England for Colombo and East Indian ports, and laden with an especially valuable cargo so far as the Emden was concerned. On board were such much needed items as china and crockery, table linens, rypewriters in fantastic numbers, tools of all sorts, firebrick, urgently needed for the boilers, oil, great quantities of provisions, and live cattle to fill their needs for fresh meat for many a day to come, not to mentiona considerable quantity of spirits, and perhaps most welcome of all, case after case of cigarettes. Had the British Admiralty loaded the ship especially for the Emden, they could scarcely have made a better selection.
   Of course, the Clan Grant was ordered to follow the Emden, who quickly led them beyond range of possible observation from Minicoy.
   As soon as it was daylight, crews were sent over from the cruiser to sort and separate for transshipment the various items of value for each department.
   They were in the midst of this when another smoke was sighted to the southward, and without waiting for the return of the men still on board the Clan Grant, the Emden sped promptly in pursuit. Whatever the stranger might be, he was not so fast, and they overhauled him rapidly.
   "Doesn't look like a merchantman to me," von Hohenzollern murmured.
   "She sits low in the water,'* von Muecke conceded.
   "She could be a monitor," said von Mueller. "If she is, she'll be heavily armored and will carry at least one heavy battery—probably heavier than anything of ours. You'd best call all hands to action stations, Leutnant."
   When they finally overtook her, however, much to von Hohenzollern's chagrin, the suspicious-looking ship proved to be nothing more formidable than a deep-sea bucket dredger, the Fonrabbel, outbound from England for Tasmania; a mere cockleshell that sat low in the water, with only a scant three feet of freeboard and a badly frightened crew, who seemed only too pleased to be picked up.
   Why such a frail craft should have been sent out in such a season remained a mystery, but it turned out that one such vessel had already foundered with all hands on the run, and that this Captain and crew had been paid bonuses before sailing from England; that all had heard of the good treatment given her captives by the Emden. They were ready and packed and even cheered when the cruiser drew alongside, showing nothing but relief when they were taken on board. As night fell and they steamed slowly westward, those off duty, at least, felt able to relax a little and contemplate this most recent accomplishment. In general the feeling was that now their supplies had been abundantly replenished they should be able to enjoy the fruits of their labors. At dawn, however, the alarm sounded once more, and the weary men hurried once more to their stations.
   Von Muecke and Lauterbach arrived on deck at the same time.
   "There's smoke reported almost due east, from a vessel evidently standing north-northwest on an interception course. Conrad," said the Captain, "you'd best alert your boarders. It looks as though there will be work for you."
   "Ach, zum Teufel!" Lauterbach swore disgustedly. "Well, your xx\xn to go with me, Anton. Franz, if we miss dinner, ask Herman to keep some warm for us, eh?"
   Anton von Guerard sighed, shrugged, then rose and joined Conrad on the deck outside. As they reached the rail, they could feel the Emden swing to a new northeasterly course and hear the jangle of the engine-room telegraph on the bridge. Underfoot the soft hum of the engines rose to a throbbing, rhythmic beat as they leaped to full speed ahead. Seas which a moment ago had been merely turned gently aside before them, were now abruptly sheared by their cutwater into twin creaming plumes of curling white. The ship's stern seemed to squat lower, and her bows rose as she sprang forward at her best thirty-one knots.
   Under such driving the Emden closed the gap between them rapidly, and within a few minutes the stranger loomed over the horizon within range of both guns and glasses. A warning shot across her bows brought her reluctantly to, and a message was quickly flashed across, telling her not to attempt to use her wireless. She proved to be a recently built combination passenger and cargo ship, the Troilus of the Blue Funnel Line. In less than an hour's time after they first sighted her smoke, Lauterbach and von Guerard, with prize crew following, ran up her accommodation ladder to come face to face with her disgruntled skipper. Lauterbach clicked his heels properly and saluted. "I am sorry to have to detain you. Captain?"
   Intent on the preliminaries, he was scarcely aware of the crew, grouped together forward, behind their Captain, or of the white-faced passengers, huddled against the midships bulkhead. Both groups were properly the concern of von Guerard.
   "Russell—Gaylord Russell," the Englishman grumbled. "What the devil are you chaps doing here? Admiralty' distinctly told me that the safest route to Aden lay thirty miles north of the regular track! I—" He stopped and reddened slowly.
   "Thank you, Captain," Lauterbach grinned. "I will pass that information on to my commanding officer."
   The Englishman opened his mouth for an angry retort, but he had no time to deliver it. Instead he was interrupted by a woman's gasp—a sound of almost pleased surprise, and then her cry.
   "Why, Conrad—Captain Lauterbach! What in the world are you doing here?"
   Lauterbach's head swiveled around with startled abruptness, and he stared at the group of passengers. At sight of the girl he flushed.
   "Caroline! Miss Grey!" he exclaimed, then recovered himself quickly. "Don't you think I should be the one to ask you that question? I am only obeying orders—going where I am sent. Is it surprising, then, that I might turn up anywhere at sea?"
   "And I," she laughed wryly, "have been trying to get home for months! Do you realize, Captain Lauterbach, that this is the fourth time that the Emden has barred my way? It is the first time, though, that I have actually seen her since Tsingtao."
   "A pity." Lauterbach smiled sympathetically. "I know that we arc supposed to be everywhere at once, but unfortunately, we cannot be in more than one place at a time."
   "You—you know—this Hun.'" Captain Russell demanded.
   The other passengers drew back a little from Caroline Grey and eyed her as if they held her to blame for everything. If she noticed it, she gave no sign.
   "I know this gentleman," she replied, and her tone was a chill rebuke. "And if I did not, Captain Russell, everyone, at least in this part of the world, knows that the officers and men of the Emden play the game honorably—whatever may be happening elsewhere!"
   Lauterbach felt his hackles subsiding. He had half uttered an angry retort to the Englishman, but Caroline Grey had not only remonstrated in a manner far more effective than anything he could have said, she had also soothed his own ruffled feelings and enabled him to regain control of his temper. He bowed toward her.
   "Thank you, Miss Grey," he said, then with a glance included all the rest, passengers and crew. Captain and officers. "Before the war I commanded the Staatssekretar Kratke, of the Hamburg-Amerika Line. Miss Grey was but one of the many English people who came out to the East with me as passengers. We were friends then. Now, though we are on opposite sides in this war, I assure you that the ideals that we shared are not forgotten. I can give you my word that you will all be quite safe. There may be inconvenience, it is true, but in war that cannot be avoided. Now, if you please, will you all go to your quarters and wait further orders. If you have nothing else to do, I suggest that you start packing your personal belongings. It may be necessary to abandon ship soon—"
   "Abandon ship!" one of the passengers gasped.
   Lauterbach turned a cool eye on him. "Exactly, sir. I said there might be some inconvenience, but I also said that you would be in no danger. If Kapitan von Mueller deems it necessary to sink this vessel, you and your belongings will be put safely on board another."
   He turned toward the English girl. "Miss Grey," he said, "I would be delighted to stop and chat with you, but I am afraid that must wait. If you will excuse me now, I will complete formalities with Captain Russell."
   She looked uncertain, almost crestfallen. "I—I hope we may talk—" she said hesitantly.
   "Later." Lauterbach bowed. "Captain Russell, shall we go up to the chartroom? I must see your papers, of course, and we can best signal the cruiser from the bridge."
   The Captain shrugged helplessly and turned to lead the way. Behind them Caroline Grey's voice sounded.
   "Captain Lauterbach—please! Only a moment!" They halted and turned inquiringly. "Conrad—Captain—is Helmuth—I mean Kapitanleutnant von Muecke—is he—"
   He looked at her almost sadly, feeling a sudden sense of helplessness. "He is with us—and well, Fraulein. Do you want me to tell him—"
   "Oh, no!" she cried. "I—I mean—I would rather he did not know that I am here—at least, not yet. I—I think it would be easier for you—for everyone."
   "Very well, Miss Grey," he said gently, "I will not mention it."
   The Troilus proved to be bound from Hong Kong for England with passengers and a cargo of rubber, tin, copper, and piece goods valued at more than twenty-five million Marks. Lauterbach relayed the information from the Troilus^ bridge, mentioning that there was "a lady" among the passengers, but giving no hint of her identity.
   From the cruiser the signal flashed back:
   Prepare to transfer captives and all available provisions to Buresk. Stand by to sink Troilus.
   From the bridge of the Buresk came frantic protests:
   Buresk already overcrowded. Have scant room for more prisoners, especially female, who will clearly need cabin to herself. Where can I put her? Also have insufficient provision to accommodate more. Klopper.
   Lauterbach could understand Klopper's embarrassment of space. Admittedly Caroline Grey's presence on board the Buresk would pose a problem. But so far as the provisions went, Lauterbach snorted. Whenever a ship was boarded, there was always a foraging crew from the Buresk close behind—a set of accomplished rascals, who never returned to their ship empty-handed. In Lauterbach's opinion, an opinion shared by every man on board the Emden, they fared well in the Buresk —very well, indeed. In fact, it was generally believed that they lived better on board the Buresk than they did on the cruiser.
   However, the pause that followed indicated that Kapitan von Mueller did not altogether discount the validity of the protest. Captain Russell was clearly distraught. Then presently a message came back from the Emden:
   In view crowded conditions in Buresk, Troilus, follow Emden in custody. Passengers and crew remain on board until ordered to abandon. Oberleutnant Lauterbach to command. Prize crew remain on board. Reassure female passenger. Von Mueller, Kapt.
   "What the devil does that mean?" growled Russell.
   "It means, Kapitan," Lauterbach told him, "that for the moment, at least, your ship is not to be sunk. For the time being you have a reprieve. When Kapitan von Mueller decides what is to be done, he will let us know."
   "Reprieve, but no pardon, eh?" Russell snorted. "Well, it's easy to make war on helpless civilians!"
   "Not so easy as you suppose, Captain," Lauterbach retorted stiffly. "I can assure you that there is not one of us who would not rather be given some other duty, more appropriate to our training. But someone must do this dirty work, and since we have been given the task we must do it the best way we can. Now, sir, I shall have to ask you to withdraw to your cabin and leave the bridge to Leutnant von Guerard and myself."
   Captain Russell's face turned a mottled red, and the veins stood out in his neck and temples. For a moment Lauterbach thought he might either have a stroke or launch into a furious attack. Strangely, the German felt honestly sympathetic.
   "I'm sorry, Captain," he said. "I'd feel the same in your place. But you can see that there is nothing else we can do."
   For an instant longer the Englishman glowered. Then without further words he turned on his heel and stalked below. It took Lauterbach a little time to set proper orders and see the helm manned by his own quartermaster. When it was done, he summoned von Guerard to the bridge. "You saw the passengers, Anton," he said. "You recognize! the woman of
   "The Fraulein Grey, of course-yes!" he exclaimed. "Do you suppose—does Helmuth know she is here?"
   Agam Lauterbach felt that cold, sinking feeling at the pit of his stomach. They all seemed to assume that he had no feeling whatever in the matter. But he controlled his expression and shook by head. "No, he does not," he replied. "She especially asked that I say nothing about her for the moment and I am going to ask you to do the same, Anton."
   rh,r h'Tu ^'-"• Y°u ^"""''^ ^'^^ P"^^^^^- "^^T^^t good win that do? He might be able to help her'"
   "In what way?" Lauterbach smiled wryly. "Neither you nor I nor anyone else aboard the Emden would let harm
   doTor^h ' '''M K '^' "^''^ ' ''""^^^^- ^^ '^^' he might do for her would be to endanger himself-don't you see? That is what she wants to avoid. She has trusted us that far let us-you and I-prove the trust is not misplaced." he saTd " ^"^^''^ ^°"^^"^ "^-^ suppose you're right,"
   "Of course I'm right," Lauterbach insisted. "Moreover she wants to spare his feelings. Whatever comes of this k
   ^ ' Rorrl'n^ his place, If you were put in such a position?" righ^." '' ''°" '"''^' "Absolutely rotten! You are
   ry^Z""— '''^ Lauterbach, "I must make sure that everything IS in order below. You take charge here. Maintain the present course and interval. I'll be up to relieve you pres^
   He slid down the handrails and checked the guard points
   mmt' /T '"' P"T ^"' ^ ^^^ ^"^^^- ^--' then returned to the promenade, where he found Caroline leaning on the rail, staring forward at the distant Emden.
   I thought you'd be along presently," she said as he came to lean on the rail beside her. "What will happen to us now?"
   "I can't answer that in any detail," he replied. "But I can repeat what I said before—that no harm will come to you. The inconvenience may be great. But there will be no danger. You see, I do not know exactly what Kapitan von Mueller has in mind."
   "But you can guess," she told him.
   "I can guess, but that is all. My guess is that Kapitan von Mueller is gambling."
   "Gambling?" She looked surprised.
   "Is that so reprehensible?" He laughed. "You see, I know that Kapitan von Mueller wishes to keep the Buresk with us. I believe he is gambling that sometime in the next few hours he will intercept some other vessel which he can use as a dump.'"
   "A dump?" she looked blank.
   " A dump.' That is our word for a ship in which we put all captives and send them, under a flag of truce, to the nearest port friendly to them—a 'cartel,' I believe, is the usual word."
   "And the Troilus?" she asked. "What will become of her?" "She will be sunk," he told her.
   "She's such a proud ship!" she protested. "And poor Captain Russell!"
   "It would be the same, you know," he reminded her, "if this were the Kratke and that were an English cruiser." He nodded toward the Emden.
   "I know," she replied, then abruptly switched the topic. "Conrad—Herr Lauterbach—Helmuth, you are sure he is— well?"
   "He is well, Caroline," he smiled. "We are all well. The Stabsarzt, Doktor Luther, has little to do except play solitaire. The sick bay is empty, and we have only one ailing among us—Leutnant Stoffers, one of our marine engineers. He has been suffering from a lung ailment since before we left Tsingtao."
   "Does he—does he speak of me?" she asked. "One does not speak of what brings pain," he replied. "He worries about you. I know that. I can tell from his expression when Tsingtao is mentioned. But he does not cry on anyone's shoulder." He almost added "especially mine," but caught himself in time.
   "Then you can understand why I would rather he did not know that I am here," she said earnestly. "Don't you see? To be so close, and yet unable even to speak—to know that we are even within sight of one another and then to be snatched apart again—that would be too cruel!"
   "It is cruel to you, too, Caroline," he said soberly. "That is only because it has happened this way," she replied somberly. "I know where he is. He does not know where I am. At least I can spare him that pain." "I understand," he told her. "I will do my best." "When we are gone, tell him," she said. "He'll hate my guts for that."
   "Not if you make him understand that I wanted it that way for him."
   "A man in love is not always so logical." He smiled gently. "He will be," she assured him.
   "Let us hope so. By the way, how did you leave Tsingtao?"
   "Scarcely in a festive mood," she said. "Perhaps you know that your Captain von Mueller put in a word for me to the Governor, asking him to help me get the necessary passes. Even so, it was not easy. Everyone who could was trying to get away—or nearly everyone. The trains were crowded, and one had to wait one's turn. Perhaps if I had tried sooner, it would have been easier."
   "Tried sooner?" he asked curiously. "What delayed you?" Her smile was wry. "I kept hoping to persuade the Australian girl—what was her name? Gertrude Voss?—to come with me, at least as far as Shanghai. But she was having too much fun with the officers from the Kaiserin Elizabeth —" "The Kaiserin!" Lauterbach v.ied. "Was she still there?" "So far as I know, she still is—blockaded there by the siege—"
   "Siege? What siege?" he demanded, startled. "Didn't you know?" He shook his head.
   "Tsingtao has been under siege by the Japs for a month," she told him. "The Kaiserin Elizabeth never did get to sea, and now I'm afraid it is merely a matter of time before she is taken—along with the city."
   "You mean—you mean Tsingtao will fall?" he demanded.
   "But that is ridiculous! The harbor—the forts are impregnable!"
   "I'm sorry, Conrad!" She shook her head. "I hate to be the bearer of bad news, but I'm afraid it is inevitable. The forts are strong, and the spirit of the garrison is high. But the Japanese have drawn a tight net around them. There is no chance of reinforcing them, or even of keeping them supplied with food and water. Sooner or later they must give.
   "They will never surrender!" he insisted, but he knew in his heart that what she said was true.
   They were silent for a moment.
   "You were speaking of Trudi Voss," he said less vehemently. "What happened to her? I shall have to tell Rudi, of course."
   "Poor man!" she said. "Does he love her very much?"
   "Don't you think he'd have to?"
   "I see you understand," she replied dryly, "so thank heaven I shan't have to go into that. As for the rest of it—well, I have told you that I wanted her to come with me as soon as the Emden had left, and perhaps if she had not been so wound up in her silly little world of playtime she would have been able to."
   "But what prevented her?" he asked. "She's an Australian, surely—"
   The Englishwoman shook her head. "Not according to your Governor von Meyer-Waldeck. When I finally managed to convince Frau Voss that I could wait no longer for her, she went to him and applied for a pass. But he contended that by marrying a German she had become a German, and therefore was not entitled to such a pass. So he refused it. She is still there, so far as I know."
   "I see," he said, then after a minute asked, "What about Frau von Braun? Did you hear anything of her? Was she allowed to leave?"
   "I'm afraid she, too, was still there," Caroline Grey replied. "Had she been willing to go at once, with the rest to Shanghai, enduring the same hardships as everyone else, I am sure Governor von Meyer-Waldeck would have helped her in every way. But she insisted that the government owed her full passage by sea directly to Germany. Since that was not possible, it could not be provided. But she seemed unable to understand, and in the end she made such a nuisance of herself with her endless whining and demands that the Governor refused to see her. In a fit of temper she locked herself in her apartment. She was still there when I left."
   "It does not surprise me. I don't suppose you heard anything about Hilde?"
   She looked blank. "Hilde? Who is she?"
   "Hildegarde Schultz," he told her, "the wife of the civilian cook of our officers' mess. He came with us voluntarily, and we are all very fond of them both. They lived in a neat little house out on Kiaochow Road."
   "I'm sorry. I'm afraid I can tell you nothing about her. I did not know."
   "No matter. She is probably still there, too. They were much attached to their little home. I doubt if she would even think of leaving it until it was too late."
   "What a mess! What a horrible mess it all is!" she exclaimed.
   "Horrible, indeed!" he agreed. "It's enough to make a man happy that he is not married!"
   "Or even unattached, Conrad?" she demanded.
   "Even that, Caroline! Even that!" he assured her.
   The three ships continued slowly on a general northwesterly course. Toward midafternoon von Guerard was recalled to the Emden to resume his vigil in the wireless room, some undeciphered signals having been intercepted. But Lauterbach remained aboard the Troilus with the prize crew, and in the circumstances he was as pleased to remain where he was. If he had to keep Caroline Grey's presence on board a secret until she was well away, the less he saw of his shipmates the better.
   At dusk they swung around and bore south again. Between eight and nine, long after dark, the bright moon revealed the outlines of a good-sized ship running away to the eastward without lights. At once the Emden swung in pursuit, signaling the Buresk and Troilus to follow, but to stand clear in the event of any engagement. As both of the latter were much slower, the stranger had already been brought to by blinker and boarded by the time they came upon the scene.
   The signals that flickered back and forth between the Emden and the newcomer, of course, were meant entirely for one another. Nevertheless, as he watched from the Troilus' bridge, Lauterbach was able to observe and read and translate for Captain Russell's benefit as much as he felt was not confidential.
   "You're in luck, Captain," he said presently.
   "How so?" Russell demanded.
   "That ship is the Saint Egbert, British, from Colombo for New York, with sugar and piece goods."
   "I must say I fail to see—" the Englishman began.
   "How that affects you?" Lauterbach interrupted. "Think, man! The ship is British. But her cargo is neutral. That gives Kapitan von Mueller a valid reason for sparing her. It is my guess that he will choose to use her as a cartel to send you and your people, and all the rest of our captives, in to some nearby Indian port."
   He was right. Half an hour later the message flashed from the Emden to the Troilus:
   BRITISH S/S SAINT EGBERT, WITH NEUTRAL CARGO, WILL JOIN CONVOY AND SERVE AS CARTEL FOR ALL PRISONERS. STAND BY TO TRANSFER YOUR PERSONNEL AT DAYBREAK.
   After that it seemed to Lauterbach that there was little need for either him or Captain Russell to remain on the bridge. He sent the Englishman below, to his own cabin, and stretched out on the settee in the chartroom to snatch what sleep he could. Only once was he awakened and summoned to the bridge outside. That was shortly after midnight, when the Emden intercepted yet another vessel. This one turned out to be the S/S Exford, British, under charter to the British Admiralty, out of Bristol with 5500 tons of the best Cardiff coal for various English naval bases in the Far East—a prize, indeed. Her cargo, combined with that of the Buresk would enable the Emden to keep the seas for several months more; perhaps even to make her way around the Cape of Good Hope and into the South Atlantic—for the Indian Ocean could not remain a happy hunting ground much longer.
   It never occurred to Lauterbach, however, that this new capture might have any significant effect upon his own personal destiny.
   To hold such a minor flotilla together under conditions of total blackout, especially after the moon set, was quite a trick. Nevertheless, Emden managed it without event save for a near collision between herself and Exford. When day broke, another problem made itself uncomfortably apparent. With her officers and men scattered among the several prizes, the cruiser was in an awkward position. Had an enemy warship appeared at that moment, she would have been forced to fight at something less than half strength.
   As a result throughout the little fleet both officers and men were nervous and jumpy, and only too happy to get the necessary work done with as much dispatch as possible. The sun had barely shown its rim above the edge of the sea before the transfer of captives from the Buresk, Troilus, and Exford to the Saint Egbert, began. Ac the same rime, provisions sufficient for her sudden influx of passengers were put aboard the Saint Egbert from the Buresk and Troilus.
   Bleary-eyed and unshaven, Lauterbach counted off the Troilus passengers and crew to the waiting boats. When it came Caroline Grey's turn to go down the ladder, he drew her aside for a moment and took her hand in his.
   "I'm sorry it has turned out like this, Caroline," he said earnestly, "but you will be safe now to India, at least, for all nations recognize a cartel. Why not just wait it out in Bombay or Calcutta? They're not likely to be attacked, and whatever the outcome, the war cannot last forever."
   "Thank you, Conrad," she said. "I—well, I will consider it. You will tell Helmuth that I am all right—after I'm gone?"
   "When you have left," he promised, "He will feel better if he knows that you will be safe from here on."
   "Thank you again, Conrad," she said. "Tell him not to worry!"
   She left quickly, and he wondered if she meant to accept his advice, or were her last words merely, in effect, a smoke screen?
   By midafternoon the Saint Egbert had been sent on her way to the Indian port of Cochin, on the Malabar Coast, no more than a day's sail distant, and a safe point from the Emden's point of view, being comparatively out of touch with those major British bases from which trouble might be expected. It would require at least twenty-four hours for the authorities there to get in touch with Bombay or Colombo, and by that time the Emden and her comrades would be far away.
   The grim work of destruction went on aboard the captive vessels, and by nightfall it had all been completed. Exford was manned by a crew from the Emden, under the command of Kapitanleutnant Gropius, and sent off to a rendezvous in the Indian Ocean, near the Cocos Islands, where at a specified date she would meet with the Emden and the Buresk. Meantime, but for those few, all hands were once again gathered aboard the cruiser, and Conrad Lauterbach went to make his report to the Captain. He lifted the curtain and stepped through the doorway—and froze in his tracks.
   Kapitan Karl von Mueller sat behind his desk as usual. But drawn up beside him, clearly in conference on some matter of ship's business, sat the executive officer, Helmuth von Muecke.
   For a moment Lauterbach hesitated. Von Muecke was the last man he wanted to see at just that moment. He murmured an apology and started to withdraw. But von Mueller stopped him almost jovially.
   "Not at all, Conrad!" he cried. "Helmuth and I were only discussing our recent activities and speculating on the future. We have been expecting you. Come in!"
   There seemed to be little choice. Lauterbach stepped forward. After all, he reminded himself, he would have to tell von Muecke about Caroline sooner or later. Now was as good a time as any.
   "Reporting, Kapitan!" he said. "I'm sure you are already familiar with the details—such provisions as were needed for the prisoners were sent on board the Saint Egbert. Whatever remained that could be of use to us was divided between Emden and Buresk, and Troiliis was then sunk. I will submit my written report of all this to you in the morning. In the meantime, however"—his glance slid toward von Muecke— "there are some items of information in connection with the Troilus which I discovered, and which, though they have no proper place in an official report, will be of interest to you and others on board."
   "So?" Von Mueller's eyebrows lifted. "I do not understand. Are they of a private nature?"
   "To some extent, yes, Herr Kapitan," Lauterbach replied. "But I would rather consult with you before mentioning it elsewhere."
   Von Mueller nodded.
   "In the first place," said Lauterbach, glancing at von Muecke, "the female passenger on board the Troilus was Miss Caroline Grey."
   Von Muecke's head jerked up. "What?" he shouted. "Why wasn't I informed? Do you mean to tell me that all this time—"
   "Kapitanleutnant!" von Mueller interrupted sharply, though there was a hint of a smile at the corners of his mouth and eyes.
   Von Muecke caught himself with visible effort. "I am sorry, Herr Kapitan!"
   "You were saying, Herr Oberleutnant?" von Mueller prompted.
   "Yes, Herr Kapitan," Lauterbach replied, "the lady was the English Fraulein, Caroline Grey. I anticipated some protest from the Kapitanleutnant when it came time to make that fact known. Nevertheless, because she asked it I did not identify her before now—"
   "Why would she ask such a thing?" von Muecke exploded. "Surely, she recognized the Emden! And she recognized you, didn't she? Did she ask about me at all?"
   "You were the first one she mentioned, Helmuth," said Lauterbach. "When I assured her of your health she asked me to say nothing of her own presence because she felt that such a swift passing encounter could bring only distress to you. She wanted to spare you that."
   "But what of her?" von Muecke demanded. "Wouldn't she—"
   "Feel the same?" von Mueller interrupted. "Helmuth, don't you see? Of course she did, or she would never have made such a request. She already felt the hurt, and she did not want you to feel it, too. It was enough for her to know that you were still safe and in good health. I am sure that was the way of it. Am I right, Conrad?"
   "Thank you, Kapitan," said Lauterbach fervently. "You are exactly right!"
   a/^,?"^ f^\ '"^^ ^^^'■^ ^^^ nothing more, Conrad?" Von Mueller looked at Lauterbach searchingly.
   "••I am certain, Kapitan," Lauterbach replied emphatically, she has no interest in espionage, nor-you should be pleased to hear, Herr von Muecke-any interest in any other man, such as myself. I could wish it otherwise. But—"
   "Never mind, Conrad," von Mueller broke in, "I think we understand. I believe you said that you had several matters to report?
   "I do! We can thank Miss Grey for the information. Tsingtao IS under siege-has been for many weeks now-by the Japanese. It cannot hold out much longer. Frau Voss and Frau von Braun are still there. Of them Miss Grey gave me information. Undoubtedly Frau Schultz is also still there though as to that she could not say. I think these men deserve to hear from me what she had to say."
   "I understand, Conrad," von Mueller said, "and I agree. You alone can report it exactly, so speak to them individually. I will call all hands together and announce the general situation. Try not to break their hearts, eh, Conrad?"
   "Zum Befehl, Herr Kapitan!" Lauterbach replied.
   Try not to break hearts!
   Lauterbach listened as von Mueller addressed the assembled officers and crew. ". . . Tsingtao is under siege. There IS no possible means of relief. Our garrison will resist as long as possible, but already they are eating rats, cats, and anything that will sustain life. I cannot give you reports of individuals, though Oberleutnant Lauterbach has managed to pick up a few details. The single fact remains that now we are without a base-without a port of refuge. But, gentlemen, we shall continue to serve!"
   The men cheered. There was no question as to their spirit.
   As the Emden and her consort swept under the belly of Ceylon, then bore east and finally east by north, it was clear that Captain von Mueller had a definite objective in mind. But even to his principal officers, in council, he made no mention of it. Battle practice, gunnery exercises, conferences, and even a sort of boning classroom work for the officers, probing their knowledge of navigation and their familiarity with charts and waters to the east, became a regular order of the day—and night, for at any instant all hands might be tumbled out to action stations. In a way it was much like the first few weeks after their departure from Tsingtao. But it was far more concentrated and intense.
   Because their pace had to match that of their slower companion, it took four days to reach across into the lonely Nicobar Islands, where at dawn they slipped into the secluded shelter of Nancowry Harbor. There the Buresk drew alongside, and once again the Emden's bunkers were filled against inifjending activities. At dusk the Buresk weighed once more and stood away to the southeast. Half an hour later Emden, too, left her mooring and continued east on a course that would bring the island of Sumatra between them.
   Through the night and the day and into the next night that followed they steamed steadily, and old hands among the crew noticed that almost from hour to hour the course was altered, a degree, a half a degree, a few points southward. At the same time, gunnery was ordered to the alert. All guns were cleared and batteries readied for instant action. Radio silence was imposed, and most significant of all, the false fourth funnel was hoisted into place.
   When that work was done, supper was served. But they had scarcely finished eating before all hands, both officers and men, were mustered aft, where they could be addressed from the after turret. By that time it was obvious that they were about to make another raid and that the objective would be somewhere within the Strait of Malacca. But whether it was to be Malacca itself or the strong British base at Penang, or even a daring smash at Singapore, no man could yet say. When they were finally assembled, they fell tensely silent, waiting. From his vantage point on the turret von Mueller surveyed them soberly, yet with impassive satisfaction. There was no doubt in his mind that they were ready.
   "Men! Shipmates!" he said at length. "Tomorrow at dawn we will go into action once more at Penang. I need not tell you that the undertaking will be a far more hazardous one than our easy strike at Madras. For those of you who have not been there and are not familiar with the port I should explain that the second—or possibly even the first by this time —most powerful English naval base in this part of the world is on the island of Penang, adjacent to and actually a part of the city of Georgetown. It is not only strongly protected in the military sense; it is perhaps even more strongly guarded by nature. From the south the only approach is by a narrow, tortuous channel, too shallow for any but very small craft, and impossible for any vessel of our size. To the east it is protected by the curve of the Malayan mainland. To the west, behind, it is sheltered by the full width of the island. Only from the north can it be reached, and from there only through a narrow bordeneck. What precautions the English have taken to safeguard that passage, we can only imagine. However, we do know that our British cousins are notoriously scornful of innovations and almost smugly confident of their own invincibility on water anywhere. This may have led them to an imprudent lack of care. We can only hope so. If they have neglected to protect that one point, we will have an excellent chance of success, and this is what we must count upon. However, I feel it only fair to let you understand fully the risk we run.
   "As I have already indicated to you, we will time our strike for the moment of dawn, when we will have sufficient light to see our targets and the English will scarcely have awakened. We will make our approach in the early darkness, rush in when there is enough light, open fire rapidly, circle, and run out again as quickly as we came. We will have the advantages of surprise and mobility. These stood us in a good stead at Madras. Let us hope they will serve us as well here. I want every officer and man in his appointed place and fully prepared to do his best. If this is done, we may do most serious damage, and even strike a crippling blow at the enemy's ability to operate efficiently in these waters."
   There was a quick, spontaneous burst of applause, followed immediately by cheers, first for the Kaiser, then for the Fatherland, and finally for their Captain and ship.
   The Captain had not exaggerated. The dangers were great. But at the same time, he had been shrewdly accurate in his estimate of English overconfidence. Toward two in the morning the outer light of Pulo Penang Channel came in sight, and the officers on the bridge were astonished that under the circumstances the marker should still be there. Indeed, they were more than a little suspicious of a trap. But there was none. With the lead line going and by following star sights they crept in.
   As they entered the channel the moon was still shining, and it seemed almost impossible that they would not be spotted by signal stations on shore. But an encouraging bit of good fortune came their way when a large merchantman swept into the channel just ahead.
   "Hard starboard and circle!" commanded von Mueller. Von Muecke looked at him inquiringly. "Let him have a little more lead and follow him in. He can't possibly make out our lines clearly enough in this light to recognize us, and he may be accommodating enough to guide us all the way."
   They maintained a discreet interval for some distance, and to their astonishment, passed several more lighted channel buoys. Then just before they slipped into the narrows, they passed the stranger, anchored and waiting for a pilot.
   "There he is," remarked von Hohenzollern. "Now what?" "Keep going," said von Mueller grimly. "If we hesitate now, he'll be sure to recognize us. If we keep on confidently, he may take us simply for an unidentified Allied man-of-war going straight on about our business. It's risky but we haven't much choice."
   In the waning dark, when there were yet deep pockets of shadow along the shore and up into the hills, they pressed on through the narrows and swung in toward the naval anchorage. Still they passed unchallenged, even as they entered the harbor itself. Probably the dummy stack accounted for that, but as they swept into the harbor lane and the light grew stronger all hands stood their posts with mounting tension. On the bridge von Muecke swept the anchorage with his glasses. "I count one cruiser," he remarked. "She looks like the Russian Jemtschug. There are several French torpedo-boat destroyers moored a little distance out and beyond. No English at all in sight—"
   "Too bad!" said von Mueller.
   "There's a lot of merchant shipping scattered all over the place," continued von Muecke. "There must be some Englishmen among them. But then there will be neutrals, too, and they're not our game."
   "In a situation such as this," said von Mueller, "neutrals must look out for themselves. They know what flag flies over the port, and must be aware of the risks they run. We will not fire upon them if they identify themselves. But we cannot be expected to distinguish between them."
   "Then what are your orders, Kapitan?"
   "I won't pretend that I am not disappointed," von Mueller said. "I had hoped for better sport, but in the circumstances there is no question as to our duty. The Russian must be our primary target. Let the forward turrets open fire on him as we go in, then as we roll around to port try to finish him off with the starboard torpedo. Reload the starboard tube as we continue our turn, then as we start back on our outward run let them have the portside torpedo to complete the job. Let the fore and aft turrets then concentrate their fire on the Frenchmen while the main batteries devote their attention to harbor installations and shipping. In such an operation as this we can waste no time. We will have to fire a good deal at random."
   "There's no doubt about that, Herr Kapitan," replied von Muecke.
   That was the plan the Emden followed as she swung in at high speed, around the now dawnlit circle of the inner harbor. On shore a few houses gave smoke to the sky from their chimneys. Behind them and around the bay the green of the palms and mangroves and the shadows and folds of the hills looked quiet, peaceful. So far as they could tell, few of the ships at anchor had full steam up. Even the grim gray naval installations seemed to be still asleep. Von Mueller looked toward the Russian cruiser Jemtschug.
   In command of her, he thought, would be the suave, urbane, rather likable Baron Ivanoff, who had always seemed to him far more suited to the diplomatic drawing room than command of a warship. He remembered occasions when he and the Russian had exchanged courtesy calls; at Tsingtao, at Shanghai and Vladivostok. He had always thought of the man in those days as a pleasant fellow and a fair seaman. But there was no time for that now. He turned toward the gunnery officer.
   "You may open fire forward now, Herr Gaede!"
   Dirk Gaede pressed one of the several buttons on his control panel, and the batteries in the two forward turrets slammed almost in unison. The Emden lurched, stumbling a little under the sudden recoil. From the armored conning tower they could see the swift flight of the projectiles as they streaked out dead on the target at almost point-blank range. But even as they watched them hit, bright orange explosions in sudden towering columns of black smoke, the Emden began her tight turn to port.
   Von Mueller nodded to Gaede and to Kurt Witthoeft, at torpedo control. "Starboard batteries now, Herr Gaede! Forward batteries to continue fire on target. Starboard torpedo, Herr Whitthoeft. Fire when ready."
   "Jawohl, Herr Kapitan!" Witthoeft bent to his work.
   It was necessary' to aim the torpedos from above, since von Hohenzollern and his crew in the torpedo flat below the after deck could not see the target. Consequently the response was not as swift as that of gunnery.
   But it was not less effective. At Witthoeft's first signal the torpedo crew below stood by their weapon, activating the motors and readying the release gear. Underfoot they could feel the ship roll as she bit into her turn. On the torpedo-flat signal board the command flashed: "Clear away starboard tube." They tensed. Von Hohenzollern found that he was sweating profusely. Then came the one word, flashed on the board: "Fire!"
   Von Hohenzollern tripped the release button, and the big missile leaped from its tube with a sort of sighing hiss. At the same instant, the guns of the batteries directly above opened fire. In the enclosed space of the torpedo flat the noise and jarring shock of the explosions seemed almost ominous. They waited, every man among them with his head cocked, his ears straining to catch some sound that would tell them of a task accomplished. The seconds seemed to drag by, each one longer than the one before. Then in a brief lull in the closer crashing above there came a distant, dull, and heavy but unmistakable thudding boo?n that could mean but one thing: their weapon had found its mark.
   There were cheers and congratulations below.
   On the conning tower there was less exuberance, but scarcely less satisfaction. The torpedo had been sent away from 380 yards, from which range it was hardly possible to miss. From where they stood, they could watch its white wake as it sped, boiling away like an arrow, to its mark. As it went the batteries opened, peppering the fore part of the Jemtschug, where the Russian's crew was quartered, with the object of putting the men out of action before they could reach their guns. Great rents appeared, and they could see that some fires had already been started.
   Then the torpedo struck, well below the water line, a little aft of amidships, and all the rest was overshadowed. The report was not loud, but rather muffled and ponderous. At the same instant, a great, towering column of almost solid white water spouted up beside her, reaching well above her masthead. The cruiser herself reared high in the air, so that for an instant they could see daylight under her keel. Then slowly, as if she were suddenly very tired, she settled back and began to sink, her bows yet higher than her stern, until the water was lapping at her deck.
   Despite the completeness of their surprise some of the Jemtschug's men apparently made their way to the after guns and at least briefly managed to return the Emden's fire. It was a gallant effort, but a futile one, for the Russian's gunnery was poor, their aim bad, probably owing to the fact that their main controls had already been shot away. Their shots went high and wild, most of them landing among the anchored merchantmen.
   The Emden's speed made her a difficult target. But she was forced to dodge and flit and pirouette like a ballet dancer as she skimmed through the tangle of anchored ships to avoid either colliding with one of them or—an even greater danger—falling afoul of their anchor cables and sheering away a propeller blade.
   Accordingly, this portion of the attack actually required the greatest skill and concentration. At the same time, a stream of fire seemed to be directed at them from a position somewhere well within the harbor. As the first shells flew over them from this new direction they were momentarily surprised, but they soon saw that they were coming from the French destroyer DUbennlle, which lay at some distance from the other ships, and which had not been previously noticed. To meet this new threat the guns of the after batteries and turret were turned in that direction as the Emden swung into the outer leg of her circle.
   "We'll come around again and finish them handily when we're done with the Russian. In the meantime, Witthoeft, ready?" asked von Mueller.
   "Ready, Herr Kapitan!" the torpedo officer replied.
   "Fire from portside as soon as you are on target."
   "Wear away port tube!" flashed the signal board.
   In the torpedo flat the crew went through the same movements as before with swift precision, as calmly as if this were merely a drill.
   The range closed to seven hundred yards.
   "Fire!" flashed the board.
   Once again they counted the seconds, waiting tensely. Then abruptly came a tremendous jolting explosion that almost seemed to compress their own hull. This time, their cheers were even louder. To cause such a blast they must have found either a magazine or the Russian's torpedo flat. In either case there was little chance the enemy could remain afloat.
   From the conning tower the impression was even more positive. They saw the torpedo streak straight into the stricken enemy's side; saw the explosion as it struck, and then, so closely that it seemed a continuation of the first, a second, far more tremendous blast. Before their eyes the Russian was literally torn into pieces. Huge chunks of armor and metal sprayed crazily in all directions, raining down seconds later to create even greater hazards all around. The first bright spout of the blast thundered skyward. Then a thick cloud of yellowish smoke rolled in to blanket the scene, a cloud that was filled with the flash and rumble of still more explosions as the fire swept into those few remaining magazines and flats that were left aboard the stricken ship.
   The crew was still staring at the spectacle in awe when the communicator buzzer from the lookout in the foremast sounded urgently. That was von Guerard's action station. Von Muecke reached for the telephone.
   "Conning tower. Von Muecke," he said.
   "Foremast, Herr Kapitanleutnant—von Guerard here. Beg to report suspicious vessel just entering harbor, apparently under forced draft."
   "What does she look like?" von Muecke demanded.
   "Sorry, Herr Kapitanleutnant. There is too much smoke, but she may be a torpedo-boat destroyer."
   "Very good! Thank you, Leutnant!" von Muecke said.
   He reported the new development to von Mueller, and together they scanned the bay. They had no difficulty locating the vessel. She was just inside the narrows and standing directly toward them, obviously in a great hurry. But it was still impossible to make out her identity or even her lines. She was shrouded in her own smoke.
   Von Muecke looked toward the Captain.
   "Anton is right," von Mueller said quickly. "She could be a destroyer—or even a light cruiser. In any case, we cannot risk her bottling us in. We'll have to abandon that noisy Frenchman and tend to this. See to it, Helmuth. Be prepared to open fire at six thousand yards."
   "Jawohl, Herr Kapitan!" von Muecke acknowledged, and they rolled away from the attack and sped off to meet the incoming stranger. At six thousand yards the Emden opened fire, but owing to the smoke, their aim was poor—perhaps fortunately, for the stranger turned tail, and as she ran clear of her own smoke screen, revealed herself as a tiny, unarmed government steamer.
   The order to cease fire was, of course, given at once. But so far the Emden was concerned, the damage was done. Armed or not, the little craft had done her comrades, lying inside the harbor, a great service and probably saved more than one of them from destruction, for she had drawn the Emden off, and now that they were outside there was no possible chance of re-entering. The element of surprise was gone. Von Mueller gave the order to continue out through the channel and secure from stations.
   .
   V. Gott mit Uns
   November 1914

   Gott mit Uns [God Be with Us]—the motto of the Knights of the Swan, founded by Frederick II of Brandenburg in 1443. Later restored by Frederick William IV of Prussia, in 1843.

   After their strike at Penang the Emden stood swiftly back up and across the Malacca strait, north by west, until she had cleared the tip of Sumatra, where she came about again and stood southeastward on a course that would carry them down past Simalur. Less than twenty-four hours later they met their comrades in the Buresk at the appointed rendezvous, off Banjak. The Markomannia, however, which they had hoped to meet in the same waters, was not there. Nor did they ever see her again. They could only conclude that she must have been sunk.
   That was a Saturday, but too late in the day for more than informal celebrations. On Sunday, von Mueller felt that the men of both ships had earned a brief respite and announced that only those duties essential to the safety of both ships would be required. The customary Sunday services would be held, of course, after which there would be certain ceremonies lasting but a few moments. But until then, and after, their time would be their own, to utilize as they pleased. He regretted that no shore leave was possible, but in time of war all must understand that one did the best one could with such opportunities as came to hand. In recognition of the limitations of their situation the wardrooms of both ships would be open freely to all officers. For the men there would be beer. Only those who abused the privilege would be refused.
   The announcement was greeted with enthusiasm. During the evening the officers exchanged convivial visits; the crews fraternized. On the following morning few felt like rolling out of their hammocks before church call, and the usual Sabbath Day services were solemn as ever. When that was done the announced ceremonies were held, and proved to be the list of promotions and advancements, some as a matter of routine, time in service, but many as a result of the crew's performance during the recent brief actions. The rest of the day was given over to due celebration of such promotions and the proper wetting down of new stripes.
   But Monday was a different matter. At midnight both vessels weighed and stood slowly southeastward toward the Pogg)' Islands. At sunrise the gongs clanged, calling all hands to coaling duty once more, and many an aching head spent many a miserable hour at the chore. Toward midday they were visited by a Dutch government officer in a bright white launch and a limp white suit, who came to make sure that they were outside the three-mile limit. When he was reassured he consented to accept a whisky and soda in the wardroom, and since there were a number of officers who could also use a drink themselves—and since he was not loath to accept a drink with each—it was late in the afternoon when they poured him into his launch and headed it back toward Padang. Whether it ever reached there or not was never known, but all in all, the day was marred by only two things. The first was so minor that iteven brought laughter in the wardroom when they heard it from the Dutchman. Portugal, it seemed, had formally declared war on Germany, and must now be counted among their enemies. The second was more serious. In Franz von Hohenzollern's coaling division a coal sling had broken at the height of its swing, and the load of sacked coal, crashing on deck, had broken the left leg of Torpedo Obermatrose Possehl, one of the torpedo crew's most valued men. It was the first and only casualty of any sort, in or out of action, that had touched the ship since her departure from Tsingtao!
   They finished coaling just before dusk, cast off, and headed due south, following, as customary, a fictitious course until they were out of sight of land, when they bore eastward toward Sunda Strait, where it was hoped that a few more unwary ships might be found passing.
   But Sunda proved unproductive, and though they cruised for some time in and out of that highway of all nations, in view of Krakatoa, they had no luck. British shipping apparently had been frightened from those seas by reports of their presence, and indeed, conversations between those two old archenemies of theirs, the Hampshire and the Minotaur, suggested that the search was converging upon them. Karl von Mueller would have liked to give it a few more days trial. But prudence was the better part of valor. He pored over his charts.
   "Set a course southwest, two two six," he ordered.
   "Two two six. Jawohl, Herr Kapitan!" replied the officer of the watch, and the Emden heeled and turned and started the long run that might lead them around the Cape of Good Hope, into the South Atlantic.
   Everyone hoped so, for that would bring them that much nearer home. But von Mueller had plans for a stop en route, and the plan was not entirely new. Long since, he had foreseen the day when such a trial would be necessary to the morale of both officers and men. To sneak from the Indian Ocean with nothing to their credit but a few dozen helpless merchantmen stopped and robbed would be ignominy that would haunt them to their graves. Given a resounding victory and an honest flight before overwhelming pursuit, they could hold up their heads. In a sense it was something like the fox who raided the chicken coop and then outwitted the hounds. The strike at Madras, the blow at Penang, had been gestures in that direction. But they had been too successful. They had left the British bewildered. Obviously they could not conquer all British forces in those waters with a single light cruiser. But they could and had disrupted much of the enemy's shipping to the east. The enemy was on the prowl in search of them. But his search had been disorganized and spattered. One more sharp blow, unlocked for, would upset his calculations even more and set him to racing from Australia to India and down to Africa and back again, looking for a will-o-the-wisp. All to no purpose, as the Emden would long since have slipped into the South Atlantic, where, under orders from home, she could operate as needed!
   But where was such a target? Singapore? It would be a long run through narrow neutral waters. Sarawak? That would be even worse. Beyond those two there was nothing to the north that they could hope to reach. But there was a target to the southward—Direction Island, in the Cocos-Keeling group—where the cables from Africa and India and Australia crossed, and where there was a major wireless installation, in touch with half the world. Such a blow would be even greater than a spectacular strike at Singapore, for it could cut communications in three quarters of the globe.
   That voyage toward the south and west was no pleasure cruise. Once clear of Sunda Strait, they met the full sweep of the late autumnal monsoons that blew across the Indian Ocean with no stick or stone for a thousand miles and more to break their force. The winds came steadily from starboard, and the seas ran heavily with them, with the result that the Emden rolled and plunged, and kicked and bucked.
   In the officers' galley it brought wails of protest from Herman. "How even can I keep hot the coffee if you make like this the ship?" he demanded.
   But there were others, too, who had their hands full. In the stokehold there were ugly burns and blisters as the men, teetering with loaded shovels and seeking to find the right moment to scatter coal upon the fires, were sometimes flung against the furnace doors. Sometimes, too, down there, the fires themselves would lift from the grates with a sudden surge, and then thump down with a nrlnmip as the ship began to lift out of the sea's trough. On such occasions the furnace doors would blow open in the stokers' faces and the flames lick out to singe their hair and beards, while in the boiler room above, the engineers on duty would hold on to whatever pipe or valve was handiest to keep from falling, praying silently that the tubes would not blow. On deck it was scarcely possible for a sailor to pass from aft to forward or return without the aid of ropes. On the bridge there were wisps and mists and flung spindrift and stinging spray that kept fogging glasses, and of them all only Kapitan von Mueller seemed to know exactly where they were. Somewhere out in those waters, south of Sumatra but yet well out in the Indian Ocean, they all knew that they should meet the Exford. But there was scarcely a man among them who could say at what spot—or could find it if he knew.
   For the first time in the cruise they came to appreciate fully their Captain's skill. He seemed to go by sniff and by feel. At midnight he was on the bridge.
   Von Muecke was already there, trying for a decent star-shoot. Adolph Gyssling had the watch.
   "Guten Abend, Herr Kapitan!" They greeted him.
   Von Mueller returned their salute informally. "At ease, gentlemen," he said. "What do you make our position?"
   Both looked distressed.
   "Well, sir," said von Muecke, "we're southwest of Sumatra and north of the Antarctic, east of Africa and west of Australia, I'm afraid that's about the best we can say under the current conditions."
   Von Mueller chuckled, but there was a certain rebuke in his laugh. His officers were expected to know their exact position at all times. "I'm afraid you are both wrong, gentlemen," he said. "The truth is, we are right about here." He waited while they laughed. "Actually we are right now at eight degrees seventeen minutes south; one hundred four degrees eight minutes east. You are a little off course. But in a sense you are right. It should be right about here that we should meet Exford. You have seen nothing?"
   "No, sir!" they both responded quickly.
   "No!" said von Mueller. "I hardly thought we would, in this weather and under such circumstances. Herr von Muecke, I suggest we lie to for the rest of the night. Alert all lookouts to keep the sharpest possible watch. If she does not appear by daylight, we will begin a quartering search to southward."
   They made no sighting during the rest of that stormy night. Neither did they make contact through the next twenty-four hours. But in the misty dawn of the second day a dim shape loomed over the heavy seas ahead, and they cleared away ship for action until snapping flags at the main halyards told them that they had made contact, and that the stranger was actually the Exford.
   There was neither time nor weather for the celebration that had marked their reunion. Here in the high seas all was of the utmost seriousness. The boats that passed between the three ships were carefully manned and soberly handled. Nevertheless, they rose and swooped with the long seas, so that sometimes they were far below the ladders; at others, almost even with the rails. It was fortunate that none of the men and officers passing to and fro were injured.
   Gropius returned from the Exford, all ears and jealousy at the account of the raid on Penang. And at the ensuing council he demanded the right to change places with one or another of the other officers of the Emden. There was some argument about that, at least until von Mueller put a stop to it. "Gentlemen!" he barked. "This wrangling settles nothing. I could—and perhaps should—order any one of you into any position I think would best serve the interests of His Imperial Majesty. So that we may all feel fair about it, however, I suggest that those among you who are qualified for the command draw straws for the place. Whoever takes the Exford will rendezvous with us northwest of the Amsterdam and Saint Paul islands, at a position which I will designate. Is that understood?"
   "Jawohl, Kapitan!" said Voss.
   "Very well!" said von Mueller. "One of you must do the job. The orders will be strict and explicit. Let no one think that this will be a brief picnic!"
   The straws were cut and held by von Mueller himself, since he was clearly the most disinterested.
   The long straw was drawn by Lauterbach.
   "But—but, Karl—Kapitan," he protested, "can you—I mean—"
   Von Mueller laughed. "Can you be spared, Conrad? Believe me, we will miss you. But we will continue to operate. You drew the straw, knowing the possibilities, and in fact, I feel it is only justice. You have earned a moment of rest. Take it and be thankful! We will meet you as arranged."
   At four that afternoon, the Exford weighed and sailed toward the rendezvous agreed upon. As they left, between gray skies and green seas, Lauterbach dipped her flag in farewell. It was the last the Emden ever saw of her.

   But there was far too much in the wind for any aboard the Emden to give thought to that possibility. She was still in sight when von Mueller called another council of his officers, including Klopper and his assistants from the Buresk. When they were all assembled in the cruiser's wardroom, the Captain produced a large rolled-up chart and spread it on the long mess table, weighting it at each end with bottles and glasses.
   "Gentlemen," he said, signaling to them to come in close so that each could see for himself the area he had in mind, "you see here is a chart of the Cocos-Keeling Island. The reefs are treacherous and the surf is savage upon them. Let each one of you remember that!"
   He glanced up to be sure that they all understood, then continued. "Only one of these islands is inhabited to any extent. That one is Direction Island, often known as South Keeling, in the southern group. That island, gentlemen, is to be our target for tomorrow."
   A few of the officers present nodded understandingly, but most glanced at one another in surprise. Von Mueller lifted his hand to silence the protests they all seemed about to make.
   "I understand, gentlemen!" he said. "You think it stupid and incredible that we should go out of our way to fall upon such an insignificant spot. But believe me, it is not as unimportant as you think. This tiny spot in an empty ocean is a crossroads of our modem world—not in the sense of seaborne traffic, but in the sense of communications, for here the cable lines between Australia, Asia, India, and Africa all come together. In addition one of the world's most powerful wireless relay stations is located there. In other words, gentlemen, if we can destroy that relay station and cut the cables we will have struck a crippling blow at our enemies' ability to communicate—not only with one another, but even with their own ships at sea. You can understand, then, why I consider this undertaking far more important than our strike at Madras, or even that at Penang."
   He paused significantly, and saw that he had caught their interest.
   "Very good, then, gentlemen. Our task for tomorrow unfortunately is one of destruction. If we can accomplish it, we may gain some future admiration. If we fail, our reward will probably be sneers and censure. What we do tomorrow must be done quickly and thoroughly. We must cut those communication lines immediately on arrival, and leave the enemy, so to say, speechless!"
   He looked at them questioningly. No one spoke. "I think I am understood?" he demanded.
   "Ja! Ja, Herr Kapitan! Zum Befehl, Kapitan!" They seemed to awake with a start, each answering in his own way.
   "Very good! Then!" Von Mueller nodded with grim satisfaction. "Here are your orders. Kapitanleutnant Klopper, you will accompany us in the Buresk through the channel Once we are through, which should be well before dawn, we will part company for the time being. You will bear west and south thirty to forty miles, where you will heave to and await my signal to come in and join us at Port Refuge."
   Klopper looked up and raised his hand.
   "Couldn't we just go in with you, Herr Kapitan?"
   "Kapitanleutnant. yours is not a fighting ship." Von Mueller sighed. "It is possible that there may be enemy warships at the island. In that case there will be a fight. We cannot risk having your ship, with its valuable cargo, fall into enemy hands. As soon as I know that the way is clear, I will send for you so that we may coal. We will need full bunkers to reach the rendezvous with the Exford. Is that understood, Kapitanleutnant?"
   "Ja, Herr Kapitan!" said Klopper, somewhat crestfallen.
   "Very good!" said von Mueller. He glanced around at the other officers. "Leutnants Gyssling and Schmidt! You will report immediately, with your gear, on board this ship—the Emden—for duty. You will be relieved aboard the Buresk by Leutnants Fikentscher and Schall."
   Fikentscher was phlegmatic, but Schall's—"Papa Katz's"— jaw dropped in dismay. "Herr Kapitan—" he began, protesting.
   "Sit down, Leutnant Schall!" von Mueller commanded sharply. "I understand your reluctance, but stop and reflect. Both you and Fikentscher took part in the forays against Madras and Penang, not to mention several captures at sea. Gyssling and Schmidt have been all this time aboard the Buresk. Don't you think it only fair to give them a chance at some action, too?"
   "Jawohl, Herr Kapitan. But—"
   Von Mueller leaned on the table and fixed him with a cold ,vT" K "^ ''^&gt;;°^ ""'^'"'^ Leutnant. Let us get on with if f ''•'^ '"^^&gt;'- ^^^" ^^" ^^^^^ "Kapitanleutnant von Muecke in view of the importance of the undertaking, you will lead the landing party. Leutnants Gyssling and Schmidt will accompany you and assist in commanding such detachment as you may find it necessary to send out. You will select for your party thirty seamen, fifteen technical ratings and two men from the careless staff. That will make fifty men in all. You may select them in any way you wish, but I want them all briefed this evening so that they will be in full readiness to land at dawn."
   "Zum Befehl, Herr Kapitan!" Von Muecke was especially delighted at the free hand given him. As the Captain had left It, he was free to make his own selection of those individuals who, in his opinion, would be most reliable in an emergency.
   In the dark of night, aided somewhat by a star-studded sky and a pale lopsided moon, they slipped through the passage between the island groups, with the Buresk hanging close on their heels. Long before, the dummy funnel had been hoisted into place and the launch and other necessary boats swayed out. Everything was ready. There could be no delay when day came.
   Two hours past midnight, when they were at last clear of
   t'/r^rr'. '"^'' ?°PP'' ^ *^ ^"^^^^ ^i^^led farewell and good luck, and then stood away to the eastward. Emden herself turned toward the south and crept toward the unsuspecting prey with screws barely flipping, just enough to allow her to maintain steerageway. EveS now, when the dawn came, they would be hull do..-nin sight of the islands. I u "f '° ^""^ "^ "'^"^ P«5i°on too soon.
   whii r• ^""""^^ "^^ P"^"^' ^^^-^^° Direction, ^ which the wireless and cable stations were located, and Horsborough, which was not inhabited. Port Refuge the single harbor on Direction Island, was in sight and the all his towers reared against the paling sky.
   cnl^' h°"^ J^-^ ^=^0 A.AI. In a few minutes the sun would come up with a swiftness characteristic of these latitudes. On the bridge Karl von Mueller scanned the harbor through his glasses, then turned them seaward and searched the entire perimeter. There was no sign of an enemy vessel. Even over the topsof the palms on the low hills no telltale masthead showed to reveal a possible ambush. Nothing—only one small schooner at anchor off the end of the cable company's wharf, obviously unarmed. He lowered his glasses and glanced at von Muecke.
   "They are a little overconfident, it would seem," he remarked. "You'd think they would have at least one small guardship stationed here. But here they are, apparently not even awake! Well, Helmuth, the seas are quiet. There seems little chance of interference. I think that while you do your work on shore I will call in the Buresk and we will take this opportunity to coal."
   Von Muecke nodded almost absently. His own mind was on the things he must be doing once they had landed. "That might be wise," he said. "When we have finished our work ashore here, we may have to run fast and far."
   "That's what I was thinking," von Mueller said. "You'd best get started. We can't count on surprise much longer." Von Muecke went clattering down the ladder.
   On the bridge behind him Karl von Mueller lifted the communicator phone.
   "Sparks!" came the instant response.
   "Bridge here, Kapitan von Mueller!" he replied, ignoring the informality. "Raise the Buresk and order them in to Port Refuge for fueling."
   "Jawohl, Herr Kapitan!" The operator on duty had evidently not expected to get the Captain himself.
   In the growing light the singing notes of the wireless transmission mingled in a sort of strange harmony with the faint creaking of the boat falls, where von Muecke and his shore party were preparing to embark. The bosun's pipes twittered them away. That was at 6:30 a.m.
   The wireless and cable stations on Direction Island were located at the highest point of land. A constant lookout patrolled the roof of the low building while at the same time there were always two operators on duty. At daybreak on the ninth of November, 1914, both men had been on watch for several hours and were drowsy. But there is a stage of weariness that can be shaken off in an emergency. As it happened in this case, both the lookout and the stand-by operator picked up the alarm at almost the same instant. Down in the wireless room Jack Potter was half dozing with his headphones on. The Emden's call to the Buresk nearly blasted him out of his chair. He jumped.
   "Jesus! That's bloody close, that one!" he muttered, and automatically reached for his transmitting key.
   "What ship is that?" he clicked out. "What code? What ship? What code?"
   There was no answer. Potter snatched the earphones from his head and looked up. "Harry!" he called.
   On the roof Harry Shaw had already glimpsed the stranger ghosting in toward the tiny harbor—and noticed something odd about her fourth funnel. It seemed to waver in the breeze. Even as Jack Potter called, Shaw was opening the scuttle.
   "Jack!" he bellowed. "There's a strange ship coming in! Man-o-war, I make 'er!"
   "Aye!" replied Potter. "I caught 'er signals just now, and she ain't sending to us. She won't answer me. What's she look like? "
   "Man-o-war, like I said," Shaw retorted. "Four funnels, only I'd say there was something fishy about one of 'em. I'd say it was a fake. Wouldn't be surprised if she was the Emden.
   Harry Shaw was a Sydney man, born and bred.
   "Any stranger's the bloody Emden these days!" Potter replied. "But you might be right. Look, Harry. You can't do any more good up there. Get down now. Run and tell Mister Farrant what's up, and get some of those lazy cable men up here. I'll try to get out an alarm in the meantime."
   The trap door banged shut. Jack Potter bent to his key:
   Foreign vessel entering harbor. Warship unidentified, refuses to answer signals. Request support. . . .
   On board the Emden the receivers chattered, though there was no response from the Buresk. The operator on duty listened for an instant, then pressed down his key with one hand, filling the air with interference. At the same time, he reached for the communications phone.
   "Bridge—Kapitan von Mueller," came the response.
   "Wireless room, Herr Kapitan, The island is sending. I think they are trying to broadcast an alarm."
   "Jam it!" von Mueller ordered crisply.
   "It is already jammed, Herr Kapitan," replied the operator. "I will alert the wireless crew."
   "Well done!" said von Mueller, and hung up.
   Sixty miles to the north and east a troop convoy from Australia for Suez and the Mediterranean plodded slowly west, accompanied by the Australian cruisers Sydney and Melbourne, the British Minotaur, and the Japanese Ibiiki. All four of the cruisers and a number of the convoy picked up the words "Foreign vessel entering harbor—" After that the air seemed filled with interference, and nothing further was intelligible.
   On board the Sydney—by ironic coincidence the same ship on board which, at a courtesy reception for the visiting officers of the Emden, Rudi Voss had first met his Australian wife—the operator on duty in the wireless room came suddenly alert, and promptly relayed the scrap of intercepted message to the big cruiser's bridge.
   Captain John Glossop studied the flimsy and scowled. "She can't be one of ours!" he remarked. "We have nothing in these waters except this convoy."
   Aboard the flagship Melbourne and the Minotaur and the Jap Ibuki much the same scene was being enacted. Immediately signals went up on the Melbourne's halyards:
   Sydney stand by to investigate report of strange vessel at Direction Island.
   After that there was what seemed like a long delay, though it was actually only a matter of half an hour or so.
   In the combined wireless and cable shack on Direction Island the cable operators came in quickly but quietly to take their places at the keys. On the way up the hill they had been able to get a good look at the Emden, now much closer in to the anchorage, and there was no further question of her identity as a man-o-war. At the same time, they had seen quite clearly von Muecke and his landing party moving down the ladder to the waiting launch and boats, and there could be no question of their purpose. Darcy Farrant, the station's manager, had already gone down to the landing to meet them. The island had no armed guard, and there could be no hope of resistance.
   They knew, too, that while the wireless could be jammed, so long as the cable lines remained open they could broadcast the alarm and hope that some Allied warship was near enough to come to their rescue. The Emden could not hear the cabled messages, let alone interfere. Grim-faced, they went to work. Their keys chattered. With the first click the receivers at Perth and Adelaide, and even Singapore, thousands of miles distant, began to pick up the message:
   Very urgent. Do not reply. Foreign warship here. Three funnels. Landing men. 7 a.m.
   Immediately all three stations relayed the message to the Melbourne, Sydney, Minotaur, and Ibuki.
   On board the Sydney, Captain Glossop glanced at his exec. "Three funnels," he said. "That sounds like the Emden."
   Aboard the Melbourne signals snapped from the halyards:
   Sydney detach at once. Investigate.
   The Japanese Ibuki, without orders from the Commodore, had already run up her battle flags and swung southward. The Melbourne's wireless crackled peremptorily:
   Ibuki will return to her position with convoy.
   The slowness with which the Jap turned and went back to her post was proof of her Captain's reluctance.
   At the same time, black smoke poured from the Sydney's funnels. She seemed to squat lower in the sea as she turned and leaped to full speed ahead.
   On the bridge the exec glanced at Captain Glossop, "Remember that ugly little feller—Voss, wasn't that his name? Married the handsome young tart from the Imperial. I wonder if he's still on board."
   "Shouldn't be surprised," Glossop grunted. "Maybe quite a few others we know, too."
   On board the Buresk the Emden's order to come in had been heard, but the Buresk's transmitter was out of order and she was powerless to reply. Later, too, she overheard the nearby chatter amid the English ships, but she had no way of warning her colleague.
   Helmuth von Muecke and his party went over the side at approximately 6:30 a.m.
   "Don't waste time, Helmuth," von Mueller warned as he saw them away. "We cannot afford delay. Make sure that the installations are destroyed—but injure no one if you can help it—and be back on board by 9 a.m. We must move swiftly today."
   "As swiftly as we can, Karl," von Muecke replied. "Much will depend on what we find on shore."
   "Of course!" said von Mueller. "But don't be longer than you must."
   "We won't!" von Muecke promised.
   They reached the landing place only a few minutes after 7 a.m. while the cables were still humming. But down at the shore they could hear none of that. A rather stocky, portly Englishman, in faded shorts and an astonishingly huge pith helmet, waited for them at the end of the plank pier. He watched them chug up and pile out on the dock. There was no need to ask why they were there. The weapons they carried were eloquent enough.
   "Good morning, you chaps." he said. "We were expecting you before this." His tone held a characteristic note of censure, almost as if he were saying that had this been a British operation it would have been more efficiently done.
   "Expecting us?" Von Muecke looked a little startled.
   "Oh, of course!" the Englishman replied. "Ever since we first sighted you out there off Horsborough, hours ago. You'll be the Emden, I daresay?"
   "What gives you that impression?" von Muecke demanded.
   "My dear chap!" the Englishman smiled. "That false funnel wouldn't fool anyone except in the dark of night or a flat calm. It's canvas, isn't it?"
   "It did!" von Muecke began hotly, then caught himself. "Sir! All you need to do is show us the way to your wireless and cable installations."
   "They're quite obvious," said the Englishman. "Right up there on the hill. You can see them from here—path, too."
   He was quite right. There was little beyond a few small shrubs to hide them. Some palm trees nodded here and there, but whatever Jungle growth there may once have been had long ago been hacked away. At the base of the towers, between them, squatted the flat-topped shape of the cable and wireless building. There was even a broad, carefully stepped pathway leading up to it.
   Von Muecke turned to his two lieutenants. "Gentlemen," you will divide the party and proceed at once. Leutnant Gyssling, you will take your crew and demolish the transmission building. Be sure that there is no possibility of sending or receiving messages from this place. Leutnant Schmidt, you and your men will first demolish the wireless towers. After that you will locate and cut the several cables, where they come on shore. As soon as Leutnant Gvssling has finished his work inside, he will assist you in the complete destruction of the building itself. This place must be rendered entirely inoperative. Is that understood?"
   "The quarters, Herr Kapitanleutnant? The outlying buildings? What should we do about them?" Gyssling asked.
   "Leave them alone," said von Muecke. "We do not make war on defenseless people, Leutnant. Our task is simply to make sure that they cannot pass on vital information."
   "Jawohl, Herr Kapitanleutnant!" Gyssling responded.
   The chubby Englishman had listened without quite understanding all that was said. ''You might as well have these," he said, holding out a bunch of keys.
   Von Muecke looked startled. "You—turn them over?"
   "What else?" The Englishman shrugged. "If I did not give them up, you would just destroy the buildings, anyway. Most of them contain nothing of interest to you, so—see for yourself. Isn't it simpler that way?"
   "Thank you!" Von Muecke bowed—a German bow, from the waist, with a click of the heels. "This will make things more simple."
   He glanced up toward the tall towers and the low, flat-roofed shack between. "I am sorry we must destroy all this," he said.
   "Don't apologize," said the Englishman, "It's only what we expected."
   "And you don't mean to resist?" von Muecke said.
   The Englishman shrugged. "What with? My bare hands, Herr ?"
   "Von Muecke," said Helmuth automatically.
   "Herr Kapitanleutnant von Muecke?" cried the other, quite obviously astonished. "Then let me be among the first— of your enemies, at least—to congratulate you!" "Me?" Von Muecke was completely mystified. "Hadn't you heard?" the English manager replied incredulously. "We had a despatch from Renter's only a day or two ago, listing those German officers who had just been honored with the Iron Cross. Your name was among them."
   Von Muecke was completely taken aback. "Mine—I?" he began.
   "But certainly! There can be no mistake about it!" said the Englishman. " 'Helmuth von Muecke, first officer and executive of HIMS cruiser Emden and so on and so forth. I realize it is the equivalent of the V.C. among us. How about a Scotch and soda while your men work?"
   "Scotch and soda?" Von Muecke was shocked. "Why not?" the Englishman was quite unconcerned. "Incidentally, the name is Farrant—Darcy Farrant—manager here."
   Above them, on the hill, there was a heavy thud, and one of the wireless towers began to lean slowly at first, then more rapidly, until it crashed in a cloud of dust.
   Von Muecke glanced at Farrant. "I'm sorry," he said, "but I'm afraid there's not time. My orders are to return to the ship as soon as possible. Will you show me the way? We may as well see how things are going."
   "Oh, must we? I rather hoped we might visit a bit," said Farrant as if he were disappointed.
   "Sorry!" replied von Muecke. To his own irritation, he found himself falling into the exact tone and manner of the Englishman. "I must be getting about my business."
   Farrant turned and led the way up the hill. At a bend in the path von Muecke stopped and looked back. The Emden lay at the mouth of the anchorage. On the distant horizon the black smudge of a steamer's smoke showed. That would probably be the Buresk, he thought to himself. Inside the anchorage a small schooner lay at anchor.
   "What's that?" he demanded.
   "Oh, her?" Farrant laughed. "She's the Ayesha. Belongs to the station. She's supposed to give me a chance to visit the outer islands once in a while, but since there's no one on any of them I use her mostly for fishing. Jolly good fishing around here, y'know. All kinds of fish we can't get at home."
   "I wouldn't be surprised," said von Muecke dryly.
   "I'll bet you would!" The Englishman grinned.
   As if in reply there came a sharp, peremptory blast from the Emden's siren. Von Muecke took a quick look at his watch and was astonished to see that it was already nine fifteen. No wonder Kapitan von Mueller was growing impatient. He hastened on to the ruins of the communications building, to find that Gyssling and his crew, according to orders, had joined Schmidt and his men in their task of cable demolition. They had succeeded in locating two of the major trunk lines—those from India and Australia—and had cut them. But the lines were thick—the size of a fat man's thigh —and armored, and tough, and they had not yet been able to remove the sections that would make repair most difficult. Moreover, there were still two other lines to be found: the line to Africa and the line to Malaya. As von Muecke plunged down the hill on the side where the men were working, the Emden's siren hooted again, urgently, insistently.
   "Call the men together, Leutnant!" he commanded. "We'll have to reassemble at once at the boats."
   Gvssling looked startled, disappointed. "But we're not done here, Herr Kapitanleutnant!"
   "Sorry!" Von Muecke was grim. "We'll have to let it go. We're summoned to return immediately to the Emden. Tell Leutnant Schmidt to lose no time obeying."
   "Jawohl, Herr Kapitanleutnant!" replied Gyssling.
   But when he came back over the hill, it was clear to von Muecke that they were too late. Already the Emden was standing out to sea, leaving them behind. On the horizon the faint smudge had taken on a vague shape.
   Even at that distance it was easy to see that it was not the Buresk.
   After the departure of von Muecke and his shore party Karl von Mueller turned his attention to getting the Emden ready for coaling. Von Muecke and his men should be back on board by nine, while the Buresk should surely be there by ten. Coaling operations would take some time, even at best, and it would be wise, he felt, to have everything prepared beforehand, so that not a minute would be lost.
   The fact that the Buresk had not responded to his wireless command to come in did not disturb him. It could be laid to any number of causes. The most likely was that the Buresk's transmitter was out of order. Such failure in merchant ships was notorious. Another possibility was that Klopper had overheard Direction Island's query: "What ship? What code?" and deemed it better to maintain silence. An even more remote possibility was that Klopper had overheard enemy vessels talking, out beyond Emden's range but within his own, and had kept silence for fear of revealing his own position and what was taking place.
   On deck the work went as rapidly as von Mueller could wish. By the time the landing party had been gone an hour, the bunkers had been opened, the decks cleared. Buresk, of course, carried booms and slings to swing the cargo over. It was not yet 0900 when the bridge buzzer rang. Von Mueller himself answered.
   "Bridge!" he said. "Kapitan von Mueller here."
   "Foremast lookout, Herr Kapitan," came the response. "There is a smoke smudge on the northern horizon. Undoubtedly it is a ship, but whether approaching or not I cannot tell."'
   "What does she look like?" von Mueller asked. "Can you make her out?"
   "No, Herr Kapitan. She is still down under the horizon. I can see only her smoke."
   "Very well," said von Mueller. "Keep your eyes on it and report to me as soon as you can make her out."
   The foremast crow's nest was von Guerard's battle station. It would do no harm to have him on the alert. The Captain punched the button, summoning the Alsatian.
   "Foremast reports a smudge to northward, Anton," he said when the lieutenant reported. "Get up there and keep an eye on it. We can't be too careful just now."
   A few minutes later the foremast buzzer sounded again.
   "Bridge!" said von Mueller.
   "Vessel to northward, Herr Kapitan," came von Guerard's voice. "She is definitely heading this way. Probably the source of the smoke seen earlier."
   "How do you make her?" von Mueller demanded.
   "She's still a long way off, but she appears to have two masts and a single funnel."
   "Only a single funnel—are you sure?" von Mueller persisted.
   "It would seem so from here, Herr Kapitan."
   "Mmm." said von Mueller. "That's probably the Buresk. She should be coming from that general direction. But thank you, Leutnant. Keep your watch on her, and report any changes to me." He turned to the signalman. "Run up your flags summoning the landing party to return immediately. They've had plenty of time to do their work, and now there's plenty of work to be done here."
   "Jawohl, Kapitan!" the man said.
   The flags ran up on the signal halyards, but there was no immediate response from shore. Knowing his executive officer, however, and being familiar with the man's thoroughness and strong sense of duty, Karl von Mueller was irritated, but not basically troubled. He had already seen the wireless towers go down. Possibly locating the point at which the cables came ashore and then cutting so as to make them difficult to repair was taking longer than anticipated. As their presence on board was not absolutely essential, von Mueller was willing to allow the land party some leeway.
   What he did not realize, however, was that everyone who had gone on shore was so preoccupied that the recall signals aboard the Emden were not observed.
   Work on deck in preparation for coaling seemed to be going along satisfactorily, and von Mueller was just preparing to leave the bridge for a breakfast of eggs, cheese, coffee, and Westphalian ham in his own cabin when the bridge buzzer sounded again, almost urgently. Impatiently he snatched at the communications telephone.
   "Bridge!" he snapped. "Kapitan von Mueller."
   "Von Guerard, Herr Kapitan—foremast. The ship I reported before is much closer now, and she is not—I repeat not —the Buresk."
   "What?" Von Mueller was startled. "How do you make her, Anton?"
   "Kapitan"—von Guerard's voice was apologetic, as though he felt it somehow his fault—"she has tall yellow masts, like an English warship, and from this angle at least, only a single funnel. She may have more, but if she does they're so lined up that I can't see them. Offhand, I would judge her a cruiserof the Newcastle class—Just a moment, Kapitan! She has just broken out battle flags and the British white ensign!"
   Von Mueller thought quickly. ^'Newvcastle class?" he said. "In that case we're fairly evenly matched, though there's no question we've a fight on our hands. Better come down, Anton, and grab some food quickly. We'll all be at battle stations and in real action shortly."
   Von Mueller banged up the phone and swung to the officer on duty—Rudi Voss, at that moment. "Call the engine room," he commanded, "and tell them I want full steam at once. This is real action. Call all hands to battle stations and weigh anchor. If Kapitanleutnant von Muecke and his party have not returned on board within ten minutes we will have to go withoutthem—we cannot wait longer than that."
   With his own hand he blew the recall siren that so startled von Muecke on shore. With his other hand he caught up the intercommunication phone and pressed a buzzer.
   "Vogel!" he said into the telephone. "Bring my breakfast up here!" A few minutes later he pulled the siren once more.
   On shore the whistle shivered the palms. "We can't wait much longer," von Mueller commented. If we stay here, we'll be caught like rats in a trap. Our only choice IS to go out and fight—and so far as I am concerned, I would like nothing better. I didn't take this command just to step on helpless merchantmen. That's the duty we have been given so far. But now we have a chance to challenge someone who will fight back. Let's give a good account of ourselves!"
   At the dock there was still no sign of activity.
   "Very well," said von Mueller grimly. "I'm sorry, Helmuth, but we can't wait. Take care of yourselves! Quartermaster, run up our battle flags and the ensign."
   "Jawohl, Kapitan!" the seaman replied.
   They were past the mouth of the harbor and steaming out toward the incoming enemy when von Mueller turned for a last look back. At that distance he could not be sure of them as individuals, but a number of men were running out on the dock. Unfortunately, there was no chance now of turning back. He knew they could not see him, but he waved automatically.
   "I'm sorry, Helmuth," he muttered, "but this is the way it is!" He faced about abruptly and did not look back again.
   That was about nine thirty. Miraculously, almost, steam was up in all boilers. Emden would need that. And now even from shore it was clear that the stranger was a battle cruiser. In fact, from his place on the bridge von Mueller could see that she was definitely not of the Newcastle class. Yet there was something curiously familiar about her.
   "What do you make of her, Rudi?" he asked.
   ''That's the Sydney," Voss replied without hesitation.
   "Oh, I am sorry!" von Mueller exclaimed.
   "Don't be, Kapitan," replied Voss harshly, "and don't worry about me!"
   "I won't—since you assure me," von Mueller said. "I would not, anyway, Rudi. We have served together. I have confidence in you."
   "Thank you, Kapitan," the lieutenant replied.
   The Sydney came in at a dead bore. Emden managed to come out past the reefs. At ten forty in the morning they were at 9400 meters' range, and opened fire.
   Karl von Mueller knew that the Englishman—or perhaps more accurately, the Australian—carried heavier fire power. The Emden's heaviest guns were 4.5's. Those of the Sydney were 5.9's, giving her an advantage of a mile or more, plus much heavier hitting power. But there was nothing else, in honor, to do. Go out and fight.
   When they reached the open sea, it was the Emden who got in the first blow. From the end of the pier von Muecke and his party watched helplessly, in an agony of despair.
   The first salvo from the Emden's forward guns seemed to strike home. From the bridge von Mueller noted some hits amidships and in the upper superstructure. But apparently they were not enough to cripple the other cruiser. The Englishman answered, and all at once the flanks of the Emden seemed to give way. Men cried out in honest hurt—such agony they had not known before.
   In the torpedo flat, aft and below decks, Franz von Hohenzollern and his crew stood by their torpedo tubes, unable to see any of what was happening; only able to wait and wonder if they would be called upon, or if all they would ever see of the action would be the shell that blasted them. Aloft, in the conning tower, over the bridge, von Mueller, Gaede of gunnery, Witthoeft, chief torpedo and tactical officer, and Zimmerman, the gunner's' assistant, directed the action. Theirs was necessarily the battle side. On the "fire lee" side, away from the action, were the navigator, Gropius, the helmsman, and the signalman. On the quarterdeck von Levetzow was at the after gun control. Geerdes commanded the forward batteries. Von Guerard was in the fore crow's-nest with a signalman to observe the effect of the Emden's fire and communicate the apparent results to the bridge.
   On shore von Muecke cursed helplessly as he saw the first shots from the Englishman find their mark. But the Emden was yet far from incapacitated. Another salvo slammed from her starboard batteries, and another almost immediately followed. The first was high and went over the Sydney. So did most of the second. But one shell was a definite hit on the bridge and carried away the Australian range finder and all of his directive gear. After that the Sydney's gunners had to sight their weapons as they would a shotgun, by guess and by God. Yet they were effective once they had settled in. Still, the condition of the seas made gunlaying difficult. The swells were long and high, once they were clear of the island, and both ships rose and swooped with them, so that it was hard for the gunners to get in a solid hit. It was necessary for them to "catch their bird on the rise," so to speak; to fire just at the instant the other ship had reached the top of a wave.
   Nevertheless, hits were made—damaging hits. The first hit on the Emden carried away the second turret entirely, killing all the men inside instantly. The second struck near the conning tower. Von Mueller and his companions were hurled in a heap together in a corner. Von Mueller was the first to rise. Immediately, and to hishorror, he saw that the helmsman, Monkedeik, was wounded. The man's left arm had been shredded from shoulder to wrist. The Captain leaped forward quickly and caught the bloody wheel.
   "Get that arm down to the surgeon," he commanded. "We'll take care of things here."
   The sailor looked at his arm dully. "It doesn't hurt, Kapitan," he said. "Down there is no safer than here. I can still steer. Let me stay."
   "Von Wittheoft," said the Captain, "break out the first-aid kit and bind this man up. Anyone with that much courage should not be denied. The rest of you get below and see what damage has been done."
   He had scarcely finished speaking when a second shell from the Englishman crashed aboard between the fo'c'sle and the forward gun. Bunte Lange was in charge there. He went sprawling over against the rail, but miraculously did not lose consciousness. He picked himself up and surveyed the wreckage. The guns were mangled. Lange wiped what he thought was sweat from his face and was only vaguely surprised to see that it was blood-red.
   Shakily he turned aft. He could do no good where he was, and the portside guns could not be brought to bear unless the Emden fell back and crossed over the other ship's wake. On the bridge Karl von Mueller realized the same thing at the selfsame instant, and relayed orders to the engine room by voice tube—the main telegraph having been shot away—to cut sharply to low speed on all engines, then cut starboard power and go full ahead on both portside shafts.
   The ship heeled, throwing Lange off balance and tumbling him against the rail. But even as she spun, the Sydney turned to flank her and smashed home another broadside. Hits scored amidships. The wireless room went sky-high, with everyone and everything inside. Emden was out of touch now. The stokers in the hold were trapped—the fires they had coaled continued to burn. Shovels melted in their hands.
   Emden drove on. She returned one solid broadside and made her enemy reel. But it was not enough. The Sydney flanked her, turning as she did, forcing her to the left—left— westward against the reef, towards North Keeling.
   The end was inevitable. The shells smashed on board. Gun rooms, fire decks, caved. The armor on the torpedo flat held, but the crash of shells against it drove most of the crew mad. Franz von Hohenzollern had all he could do to keep them in some sort of control. Perhaps it was fortunate that there was a straight reef of coral to the north. The Emden drove on it and lining. She could not back out. She could not go ahead.
   Von Mueller put his elbows on the bridge rail. His fists were clenched. "Herr Gott! Herr Gott! I have done my best! Must there be more?"
   Leutnant Lange lay slammed, twisted amid the wreckage of the railing, a pipe through his chest and his belly ripped open far down below the navel.
   There was nothing more for him.
   Nor would Herman Schultz ever again lay eyes on the little bungalow in Koaochow Road. The galley was a mass of splintered wreckage, and Herman's body rolled, oblivious, on what remained of the hot stove. Only a yellow tabby cat crouched, shivering in a miraculously untouched corner.
End of book


Взято из Флибусты, http://flibusta.net/b/596800
