

    [Картинка: img_1] 



    [Картинка: img_2] 


    An Apology
   Depending
on which version ofThe Tell-Tail Heart
you read, the spelling of Eddie’s name may have changed to Eddy. While
researching this book, I found that some historians referred to him as “Eddie,”
while others called him “Eddy.” This, too, could be said of Cattarina. I found
three different spellings of her name. Misinformation about the past is
rampant. Even tourguides were mistaken about the historical name of the street
where Poe lived (I caught this one!). To quote Cattarina, “It was enough to
drive a cat mad.” So I picked the most logical spelling of Mr. Poe’s nickname
and proceeded withThe Tell-Tail Heart.
   About
a month after publication, I stumbled onto a source document—a letter
written by Mr. Poe himself. And he’d signed it “Eddy.” This piece of
information haunted me throughout the creation ofThe Black Cats. Should
I risk the ire of readers and do justice to the past? Or ignore this trifle and
spread more misinformation?
   In
the end, I sided with historical accuracy, inasmuch as this is possible. Please
forgive my need to make this small but important change.
   Monica


   To F&
G
   My greatest sources of
inspiration
   To my
critique group
   The people who make me
reach higher
   To Edgar
Allan PoeA true literary genius
   ***
   Other
Books in the Cattarina Mystery Series
   The Tell-Tail Heart
   To
the River - Rescue by the Schuylkill

   Adult / YA
books by Monica Shaughnessy
   Season of Lies
   Universal Forces
   The
Trash Collector (Short Story)
   Children's
books by Monica Shaughnessy
   Doom& Gloom
   The Easter Hound
   ***
   Acknowledgements&
Foreword
   This
book is a complete work of fiction. However, itdoes reference historical figures. Whenever possible, the story
remains true to the facts surrounding their lives. Edgar Allan Poe did, indeed,
own a tortoiseshell cat named Cattarina. While I can only guess she was his
muse, I feel rather confident in this assertion as cats provide an immeasurable
amount of inspiration to modern writers. If you would like to learn more about
his life, several excellent biographies exist. I hope you enjoy my little
daydream; life is wonderfully dreary under Mr. Poe's spell.


   Table of Contents
   Chapter
1
   Chapter
2
   Chapter
3
   Chapter
4
   Chapter
5
   Chapter
6
   Chapter
7
   Chapter
8
   Chapter
9
   Chapter
10
   Chapter
11
   Chapter
12
   Chapter
13
   Chapter
14
   Chapter
15
   Chapter
16
   Chapter
17
   Chapter
18
   Chapter
19
   Chapter
20
   Front
Matter
   Back
Matter
   “The
Black Cat” by Edgar Allan Poe
   Excerpt
fromThe Tell-Tail Heart, Cattarina
Mystery #1

















   &gt;&lt;
   Philadelphia, 1843
   &gt;&lt;












    [Картинка: img_3] 
   The
Black Cat
   THE BODY HANGING FROM the tree spoiled
our glorious constitutional. While Eddy and Sissy abhorred the discovery, it
enraged me, filling me with desire for revenge. During my last adventure, I’d
become accustomed to the transience of human life, perhapstoo accustomed, developing a relationship most informal with Death.
So much so that when our neighbor, Mrs. Busybody, swallowed her false teeth and
expired last winter, my whiskers barely registered the passing. But this
morning’s butchery shocked me more than the ones that plagued Philadelphia last
fall. Why? Because a fellowcat had
been murdered.
   I
shuddered at the black tom overhead, at once suspicious of our new neighbors. Eddy
had insisted on moving, and I, fulfilling my role as feline companion and muse,
had followed him on his quest fornew air.
We’d settled apparently, in the darkest, cruelest part of the city. Though I
had no idea how dark and cruel when we set out this morning.
   Shortly
after breakfast, Sissy, the lady of the house, summoned Eddy to the kitchen and
uttered one of my favorite phrases.“Let’s go for a stroll,” she said to him.
“I am in need of a breeze, and from the snap of bed linens on the clothesline, God
has provided one. The market would be lovely today. Besides, Mother’s out of
rosemary.”
   Eddy
rested his fingertips on the windowsill above the sink and looked into the side
yard. I hopped to the table for a peek myself. Muddy lingered near the
clothesline with a basket of laundry and a mouthful of clothespins. One by one,
she removed the little wooden teeth from her lips, using them to peg the
sheets.“I suppose your mother will be busy for a while,” he said. “Join us,
Catters?”
   He
meant me, of course. Eddy seldom used my full name, Cattarina. I wasn’t sure of
his question, so I gave an all-purpose meow that meant both yes and maybe at
the same time. Catspeak is not without subtlety.
   Once
Sissy changed into her rose-printtown
dress, we left to marvel in the ripe delights of summer. Such a merry prelude
to murder! In this new and strange part of the city, Spring Garden Street unbuttons
down the center into an outdoor market filled with fish, hot corn, pickles, gutted
pigs, fish, paper whimsies, tobacco products, tin wind-up toys, and fish. Yet I
grieved for the wide-open fields of Fairmount. Nothing could replace the tickle
of Indian grass beneath my paws.
   Entering
the market before Eddy and Sissy, I wound this way and that between their legs,
guiding them without suspicion while they chatted. When humans are preoccupied,
directing their actions is mere kitten’s play. So it took little effort to steer
them to the appropriate stall. “Get my fish! In yer dish!” the monger shouted.
“Shad enough to grant yer wish!” His sign held the usual marks: FISH. From my tenure
with Eddy—a preeminent man of letters—I knew these squiggles
communicatedsomething. But I doubted
they adequately described the striped bass, walleye, and catfish heaped on the
counter, their scales glistening in the sun. Flies, too, had arrived in great
number to admire the merchandise.
   Sissy
waved them from her path with a copy of theGazette
she’d brought along. She opened the newspaper and examined the contents. “Three
thefts, two beatings, and not a single murder,” she said.
   My ears
swiveled atmurder—just one of the
many human words I knew. Some, likebreakfast,lunch, anddinner, could stir me from the deepest slumber; others, likeno,out,
andthat damnable cat, had little
effect on me despite their obvious meaning. And while a great many remained
beyond comprehension,murder had clawed
its way into my vocabulary. I found a piece of discarded fish skin and chewed
it thoughtfully as I listened to Sissy’s voice. When she spoke, her words came
out in a whisper. I imagined them floating from her lips like dandelion puffs.
   “It’s
been so hot lately,” she said. “You’d think the heat would sendsomeone on a killing spree.”
   “Peace
and tranquility are most troubling, aren’t they?” Eddy said.
   “I am
reading the news foryour benefit,
dear husband, not mine.” She folded the paper into a fan and waved it to cool
herself. “I know how you love crime stories. I could scarcely keep you from that
wretched eye business last October.”
   “Am I
the only one with an interest in murder?”
   Sissy
pursed her lips and fanned harder, fluttering the strings of her bonnet.
   Murder, the liveliest, most
oft-discussed topic of the Poe household. After I nabbed the Glass Eye Killer
last autumn, my deeds inspired Eddy to write“The Tell-Tale Heart.” He then
penned “The Gold Bug,” a second tale for which I take full credit. I am still
not sure how Muddy found my beetle collection between the couch cushions. Now,
with the passing of the seasons, life had dwindled to a predictable series of
events for this tortoiseshell: breakfast, nap, lunch, nap, dinner, nap, repeat.
How I longed to chase human quarry again! Alas, murderers were not as plentiful
as mice.
   Sissy
took Eddy by the arm and led him from the fish and flies. I shadowed them, pausing
to smell the cat spray on a nearby lamppost: male, geriatric, failing kidneys. Fiddlesticks.
This was no way for a huntress to live. We stopped at a table stacked with
herbs and assorted cut flowers where Eddy bought a spray of rosemary from a
roundish woman in an apron. She rolled the green twigs in a cone of old
newsprint and secured the bottom with a piece of twine. Once finished, she presented
the bundle to Eddy, who in turn presented it to his wife with a flourish.“For
you, Sissy,” he said to her. “May our love be ever green.”
   She
smelled the herbs and coughed into her handkerchief.
   Moving
from western to eastern Spring Garden District to samplenew air had not been therapeutic enough for Sissy. Eddy’s health had
declined these last few moons, too. Was it any wonder? How disheartening to
know that despite one’s best efforts, one’s beloved had no chance of surviving.
And while Eddy’s appetite had only recently resumed, his thirst for spirits had
remained steadfast through the winter. I turned and licked my shoulder, biting at
a gnat. In truth, I blamed the drinking more than Sissy’s ailment for his malaise.
   I
pushed through their legs and headed for the gate, cutting our ramble short. Eddy
had spent the dawn hours sipping black tea and pacing the floor—a
preamble most familiar. He needed to write, not parade about the market. The
humidity, too, had taken a toll on Sissy’s lungs. I turned and paused, fixing Eddy
with a stare he could not ignore. The slight downturn of his mouth told me he’d
received my message.
   He
touched Sissy’s arm. “Let’s leave for home, dearest.”
   “But we
were having such a grand time,” she said. “I thought we might stop by—”
   He took
the makeshift fan from her and laid it on a nearby stall.“You need to rest,
Virginia. Your cheeks are positively flushed.”
   She
offered no resistance, and we retraced our steps to North Seventh, turning left
on Minerva in front of our home. Before we could enter the front garden, voices
rang out near Franklin, the neighboring intersection to the west. Eddy led us
down the street toward the commotion. We rounded the corner to find a pawful of
men in front of Mr. Fitzgerald’s hardware store. Rather, they’d gathered in
front of its sprawling sassafras. The colossal tree grew in the unpaved courtyard
between his shop and the next, rising up and obscuring the buildings behind its
canopy.
   “I
say!” Eddy called to them. “What’s the trouble?”
   “Someone’s
hung a cat!” said one of the men.
   “God in
Heaven,” Eddy said under his breath.
   Naturally,
with the mention ofcat, I thought they
referred to me. When we arrived, however, I realized they spoke of a different
feline: an unfortunate with matted black fur. The tom swayed from a limb, a
rope strung round his neck, one eye gouged from its socket. The Glass Eye
Killer came to mind, yet Constable Harkness had lockedthat murderer in Eastern State Penitentiary. I sat on my haunches
and studied the gruesome sight with equal parts anger and sadness, my tail tapping
a pattern in the dust. I don’t know what devastated me more—the senseless
death or the sullying of my favorite, nay, myonly climbing tree. Furthermore, someone had nicked the bark in
several places. The marks looked like failed attempts to chop the tree down.
   “It’s
horrible!” Sissy cried. The spray of rosemary trembled between her hands.
   Eddy
held her by the arm, steadying her.“Look away, my love. Look away.”
   Mr. Fitzgerald,
the latest entry on my list of tolerable humans, scratched the top of his
balding head as he considered the scene. He’d run from his shop without a
jacket and stood before us in his waistcoat and bare sleeves. I hadn’t realized
before how thin a frame he possessed. I’d seen fatter scarecrows.
   The
wind blew, swaying the carcass like a bell clapper, disturbing the flies that
circled. I dug my claws into the earth. Was the victim my old pal, Midnight? I
circled the trunk and examined the fur on the cat’s chest. It held no white
mark like his. Their eyes were different, too. Midnight’s irises were buttercup
yellow, much lighter in color than the tom’s lone eye. I purred with relief.
   “Who
has done this?” Eddy asked the man next to him.
   The
gent wore all black like Eddy and carried a book, which he held to his chest.“The
supernatural is at work here,” he said. “I fear we’ve been visited by the devil.”
   The
worddevil sent a murmur through the
crowd. Strange. The only deviling I’d encountered had been that of an egg, and
with delicious results. I scaled the trunk, casting bits of bark to the ground,
and walked along the branch in question to the knotted piece of rope. A unique
piece of workmanship, the cord had been coiled from lengths of brown and tan
jute, the former dyed with a bitter solution that smelled of walnuts, the
latter leftau natural. I sniffed the
air. Decomposition—a distinct and unmistakable odor—had not set in.
One had only to keep an expired mouse too long beneath Muddy’s bed to
understand these things. So the cat had been murdered this morning. I turned to
the scents on the rope, learning two things: the killer was male, and he wore a
nauseating amount of cologne. If humans bathed as often as cats, there would be
no need for copious amounts of lavender and citrus oils.
   On the
hunt for more clues, I cast my gaze upon footprints below. The courtyard had
not been paved, and loose dirt preserved the marks. These prints traveled from
the sassafras’s trunk to the steps of Fitzgerald Hardware then disappeared into
the alley between his shop and Tabitha Arnold’s cobbler shop next door. I
cocked my ears at the curious sound arising from her establishment.Brush, brush, brush. Brush, brush, brush.
   Eddy handed
Sissy off to the man in black before addressing the crowd.“If anyone knows who
committed this atrocity, please step forward. You will face no quarrel with me.”
   “Or
with Constable Harkness,” someone shouted. “If you can wake him from his nap!”
   The crowd
tittered with uneasy laughter.
   I
settled on a higher branch away from the dead cat and the flies. Just thinking
about the cruelties my fellow feline suffered churned my stomach. I watched the
men through the mitten-shaped leaves. Having moved here three moons ago, I’d encountered
most of the humans in the neighborhood and recognized all but the gentleman soothing
Sissy. He patted her shoulder and said, “Take comfort in Isaiah. Woe unto the
wicked! It shall be ill with him: for the reward of his hands shall be given
him.” I lifted my head and peered between the leafy branches to spy another
unfamiliar face—an old man with a bent spine. He scratched his rear then
his elbow then his long, white beard. Fleas. I made a note to avoid him in the
future. He loitered between the buildings, away from the turmoil.
   “Come
now,” Eddy said, “surely one of you saw something?”
   Brush, brush, brush.
   “Not me,”
Mr. Cook said at last. A blustery fool who lived around the corner, his large
protruding eyes reminded me of peeled onions. “Ask ol’ Eakins. Cats are his
business.”
   At Mr.
Cook’s utterance ofEakins, the flea-ridden
oldster scurried the way of the footprints and disappeared between the shops.
Not a soul noticed—not a human soul, at any rate.
   “Eakins?”
Sissy asked. She’d recovered from the earlier shock and stood near her husband.
“I don’t recall anyone by that name, and I’ve met most everyone on our street.”
   “He
stays to himself,” Mr. Cook said, “for our comfort as much as his.” He surveyed
the diminishing crowd. The onlookers had begun to wander. “He was here a minute
ago,” he said. “I’m sure of it.”
   When
the street had emptied of everyone except Mr. Cook and Mr. Fitzgerald, Eddy
drew Sissy and the two men to the threshold of the hardware shop to discuss the
event, speaking the phrase“killed the cat” more than once. Every so often,
Sissy would glance at the tree and shake her head. Soon, the talk turned to
lighter subjects, for the men began to chuckle and gesture with their hands. That
was when Sissy left their company for mine, the dear girl. She stared up at me
with a mournful expression, the rims of her large eyes wet. “Who would do such
a thing, Cattarina? And why?”
   From
the lilt in her voice, she had questions for which I had no answers. Though I
could not comprehend her speech, more than a language barrier prevented my
response. The brutal killing of the tom had stripped me of reason. Who could
have harmed the noblest of creatures? The finest, cleverest, handsomest of
creatures?
   “Well,
we can’t leave him up there, can we? There has to be some dignity in death.” She
laid her rosemary aside and reached for the rope around the cat’s neck. But the
dear girl was too short to grasp it. So she tried to knock the cat’s body down
with a slender branch she found near the roots. The more she twisted and turned
the corpse to free it, however, the tighter the noose grew. Overcome by
failure, she tossed the stick, leaned against the tree trunk, and wept into her
handkerchief.
   Eddy did
not notice.
   Brush, brush, brush. The sound
from the Arnold’s shop would plague my dreams tonight. I joined Sissy on the
ground and rubbed along her skirt, doing my best to comfort her. The cat’s
death had upset her more than I had imagined. Throughout our previous
adventure, I had grown to…respect Sissy—yes,respect, that was the right word—and it pained me to see her
in such a state.
   She
touched the tip of my tail, her fingers wet with tears.“No one should die in
their prime, Cattarina. No one.”
   While
the black cat’s death presented me with another killer to catch and another
story to inspire, it also filled me with dread. A murdererand torturer lived in our new neighborhood, and I, for one, would
not sleep until the scoundrel was caught.











    [Картинка: img_4] 
   The
Peaceful Society of Friends
   ONCE SISSY’S WEEPING REACHED Eddy,
he left the gentlemen and joined us by the sassafras. “You mustn’t cry,
Virginia. It isn’t good for you.” He brushed the tears from her cheek. “This
has been a most unsettling morning for all of us. I think we should go home.
Muddy will be expecting us for lunch.”
   I trilled
in agreement. Eddy and I shared the same concern:lunch. Yet I could delay my mid-day meal if it meant gathering more
evidence. Last autumn, I learned the importance of early clue discovery; the
longer one waited to find them, the more likely they were to sprout wings and
fly south. In truth, I had become a ratiocinator in my own right, with powers rivaling
Eddy’s Detective Dupin, and I had certain duties to fulfill. The fact that Constable
Harkness hadn’t been summoned made my presence even more crucial.This crime fell under feline
jurisdiction.
   “She’s serving
cheddar and ham,” Eddy added. “And sour pickles. She told me on the way
out—”
   “How
can you think about eating?” Sissy said. “We can’t leave until we bury this unfortunate
soul.” She laced her fingers in front of her, signaling her resolve.
   Eddy lifted
his palms in supplication.“Be reasonable, Sissy. My tool is the pen, not the
shovel. I am ill-equipped to dig.”
   “I am
not moving, husband, untilthat cat
is down fromthat tree.” She pointed
to both objects, underscoring her words.
   Eddy
would attempt to win the quarrel with appeals, but he could no more refuse
Sissy than I him. Confident in the outcome, I headed toward the shops to look
for evidence, entering the cobbler’s first to learn the source of that infernal
brushing sound. I found the aged proprietress inside, hard at work. Tabitha Arnold
sat near the window on a low stool, her back to the door and her face to the
sun. In her hands she held a pair of black boots and a stiff horsehair brush
dipped in—I wrinkled my nose—a mixture of beeswax and soot. She raked
the bristles across the toe of the shoe.Brush,
brush, brush.At least one mystery had been solved.
   I sniffed
for the human scent I’d noted earlier, but an examination of the floorboards bore
no fruit. The murderer had certainly worn shoes, masking his scent with a layer
of leather. Had he been a customer? Further examination revealed nothing, not
even a trace of citrus and lavender cologne. Before I could steal back to the
street unnoticed, Mr. Fitzgerald appeared, blocking the doorway with his legs. I
slunk to the shelves on the rear wall and hid behind a row of wooden foot forms
in varying sizes.
   The
woman greeted Mr. Fitzgerald with a cool stare.“Have you something to say for
yourself?” she asked. She set the boots on the floor and wiped her hands on her
apron, smearing it with polish.
   “HaveI?” Mr. Fitzgerald asked. “Haveyou?”
   She
tucked a loose strand of gray behind a hairpin.“What do you mean by that?”
   He
tapped his thin bottom lip.“The cat. It was Abner’s doing, wasn’t it? Instead
of settling the hash like gents, he used violence to make a point. How English
of him.”
   She sprang
to her feet.“How dare you accuse him of somethingyou’ve done, you…you bogtrotter!”
   Mr. Fitzgerald
and Mrs. Arnold stared at each other, two mongrels on the brink of war. I
shrank against the wooden feet and waited for blood. The woman surprised me
when she sat down and picked up her horsehair brush again.“What’s the talk on
the street?” she asked.
   He
leaned against the doorframe and crossed one ankle over the other.“Craic is, Mr. Cook blames Mr. Eakins,
and Reverend Bray blames the devil.”
   “And
you blame Abner.” She pointed the brush at him and scowled. “If you go
spreading rumors about him that aren’t true, Mr. Fitzgerald, you won’t like the
results. You’ll do well to keep your mouth shut.” She looked to her empty shop.
“I ask you this: who’s going to shop near such a horrible scene? Business is
bad enough as it is, what with that—”
   Mr. Fitzgerald
held up his hand.“Don’t say it. We’ve enough trouble this morning.” He crossed
his arms. “Mr. Poe said it might bring people in,” he said. “The cat, that is. Curious
onlookers and the like. You never know.”
   “Harrumph.
Only in Mr. Poe’s world.” She resumed her polishing. “He’s an odd bird, isn’t
he? Flitting about in black, no matter the season. Dresses like a pallbearer,
for heaven’s sake.”
   “I think
it suits him,” Mr. Fitzgerald said.
   Sensing
the shift in mood, I stepped from my hiding place and padded toward the door.
Mrs. Arnold spied me and clicked her tongue in disapproval.“We have a
trespasser,” she whispered to Mr. Fitzgerald.
   “We
needn’t whisper in front of Cattarina,” he said. “She keeps all kinds of
secrets. Don’t you, girl?” I meowed at my name, giving him a good laugh, though
I knew not why. He stood at the threshold, preventing my departure. “Well, I’m gone,”
he said to Mrs. Arnold. “The saws won’t sell themselves.” He hesitated. “Whereis Abner, by the way?”
   “Under
the weather.” She gave the boot a last pass with the brush.
   Mr. Fitzgerald
touched his protruding Adam’s apple with a look of concern. “Is something going
round?”
   “Yes.”
She set the boots aside and picked up a new pair to shine. “Something’s going round,
all right, and that’s Abner—round the tavern.”
   Mr. Fitzgerald
shifted, and I shot past his ankles into the street again. The scratch of the
shoe brush had penetrated my teeth. I could not stand it any longer!
   Once
outside, I followed the footprint trail to the cut-through between shops. The
shifty man with fleas had stood in this very spot, making me think he might be
the murderer. I glanced at Eddy and Sissy—still deep in conversation—and
ducked into the opening. After a few strides, I connected with a larger alley that
ran the length of shops on Franklin. The prints led me north where they eventually
stopped at a paved sidewalk on the other side. A dog could’ve pursued the
culprit by scent alone. But since I had the good fortune to be born a cat, I’d need
to use my superior intellect to continue. A brownstone with a gabled porch lay
to the left of the alley; a small clapboard cottage with shutters and a weathervane
lay to the right.
   “Kitty!
Kitty!” a little boy squealed. “Pet kitty!”
   I
backed away from his outstretched hands, narrowly escaping the tot’s grasp. Had
I not been focused on the rooster atop the weathervane, I would’ve seen the two
children traipsing past with their mother. The shorter, pudgier whelp had been
the one to reach for me. The taller one—a littermate from his coloring—slapped
his brother on the head. “Dang it all, Marvin. Don’t touch it. You’ll get
fleas.”
   The
mother slapped the older boy on the head.“Don’t cuss, dang you.”
   When first
born, humans are little more than plucked chickens. It’s when they learn to
walk upright that they become tail-yanking, whisker-pulling monsters. And then
there are birthing complications. I hoped Eddy and Sissy would abstain from
reproducing in the coming seasons. In my youth, I witnessed an unhappy outcome with
a baby and did not wish to see another.
   Once
the family passed, I emerged again. Whenever we moved to a new locale, which
was often, I made it my business to memorize street names as Eddy said them out
loud. This, from our daily walks, I knew to be Green Street, the road around
the corner from the Poe residence. It lacked the unkempt variability I’d grown
to love and expect from the older areas of Philadelphia. I licked my paw and
washed my face. A murderer lived in one of these mouse holes. Yet without more clues,
finding him would be impossible.
   I returned
to Franklin to find Eddy on tiptoe, sawing the black cat’s noose with his penknife.
Sissy waited nearby, offering suggestions, the majority of which perturbed him,
judging by the slant of his brow. When I reached the tree, the tom fell at our
feet. I hopped back, sickened by the hollow thud of his body against the earth.
His remaining eye lay open, glazed and unblinking; the other had been gouged
out by the murderer. This was speculation, of course, but one supported by observation
and experience from the Glass Eye Killer case. The area around the cat’s eye
held no claw marks, so he hadn’t lost it in a fight. This left accident or torture.
Considering the manner of death, I’d bet my whiskers on the latter. Eddy, Sissy,
and I remained silent until the wind rattled the sassafras leaves.
   “We
must bury him,” Sissy said. “In our garden.”
   “We do
not own a shovel,” Eddy said.
   “Borrow
one from Mr. Fitzgerald. I’m sure he has several in his store.”
   “Shopkeepers
are not usually in the habit of lending their wares, Sissy.”
   “Then
we will improvise.” She knelt and lifted the tom onto her skirt, folding the floral
cotton around him. With the day’s increasing temperature, the body had taken on
an unpleasant aroma. Sissy carried out her task undeterred, concealing the body
in the folds of her dress. For all anyone knew, she could’ve been carrying potatoes
home from the market.
   “My dear…”
Eddy pointed to her chemise. The white hem flashed in the sun.
   “Let us
hurry before I’m the talk of the town,” Sissy said. “And don’t forget the
rosemary.”
   We arrived
home to find Muddy sweeping the front walkway. The trim on her lace cap framed
her face like the petals of a flower. I pitied the bee that madethat mistake. I trotted ahead of the
others and nudged through the unlatched gate to join the old woman.
   Our new
red brick home was grander than the one on Coates, though no less cozy. Eaves
protruded from either side—a bit like ears—and shaded twin entrances
that opened onto to allotments of grass. The parlor garden, on the eastern side
near North Seventh, held flowers and a spindly weeping willow. The kitchen
garden, on the western side, consisted of a vegetable patch and a small plot of
dirt bordered by a fence snarled with morning glories. In temperate weather, Muddy
and Sissy would pull their kitchen chairs under the western eave to shell peas
or shuck corn. On the rare occasion I did not accompany Eddy to the tavern, I
stayed behind to chase the errant pod or husk that slipped from their fingers. We
had left Fairmount and the country, but we had not left good times, not yet.
   When Muddy
caught Sissy with her skirt hiked to her knees, she dropped the broom and gasped.“Virginia Eliza Poe!” she said. “What has become of you?”
   “Nothing,
Mother.” Sissy gathered her skirt tighter so as not to lose the carcass.
   “You
are half-naked. Put your dress down before the neighbors see.” Muddy’s lips
disappeared beneath the press of her mouth.
   “Dear
Muddy,” Eddy said, handing her the herbs, “ours is a long story, and you are adding
unnecessarily to the length. Allow me to edit.” He led Sissy through the gate
and up the walkway to the old woman. “Join us by the vegetable patch with your
largest kitchen spoon, and all will be revealed.”
   “What
is that smell?” Muddy asked. She held her finger under her nose.
   “The
cat, Mother,” Sissy said.
   Muddy
leaned to sniff me. Curious woman.
   “No,
it’s not Cattarina,” Sissy said. “It’s…well, you will see.” She set off for the
kitchen garden and disappeared around the corner of the house.
   Muddy retrieved
her broom and squinted at Eddy.“What have you done—”
   He held
up his hand, stopping the conversation.“I have not done anything. This is
Virginia’s scheme, and we must support her.”
   They
spoke a moment longer and joined Sissy. I elected to go inside. Whatever they planned
to do with the remains concerned me less than the aroma wafting through the
kitchen window. I leaped to the sill with some effort—the winter months
had been bountiful—and entered Muddy’s domain. She’d laid out a plate of
sliced ham and cheddar on the table, along with a loaf of bread, a crock of
pickles, and a pitcher of water. Lunch was served. A cat of lesser intelligence
would have plundered the platter. Not I. Over time, I’d perfected the art of
skimming—take enough to be full, leave enough that one’s theft is not
obvious. As long as Muddy considered me inept, the kitchen would remain a cornucopia.
   I leapt
to the table and admired the old woman’s handiwork. She’d fanned the meat and
cheese in an alternating pattern. I licked the salt off the ham slices without
disturbing them then peeled the top piece from the stack and ate it. A slice of
cheese came next. The bread bored me, and the pickles repulsed me. I finished
with a few laps ofcool water from the jug and left the house through the parlor
window. From what I’d gleaned, Sissy meant to bury the dead cat, as humans often
did for one another at the end of life. I had no need for this unnatural
ritual. I preferred to honor the tom in a more practical way—by catching
his murderer.
   I trotted
through the garden to North Seventh where I doubled back onto Green, the same street
I’d happened upon after my trip through the alley. I wasn’t naïve enough to think
I’d find my prey by accident. On the contrary, I planned to seek out his potential
victims and extract information from which to devise a hunting strategy.
   Confident
in my plan, I strode through the neighborhood, head high, gait quick and light,
in search of fellow cats. One might’ve mistaken this section of Philadelphia
for a cemetery, it was that quiet. Unlike western Spring Garden District, the people
of eastern Spring Garden District—Eddy called themQuakers—kept to themselves.
   The
roads held carriages, but many travelers preferred to walk in silence. I hoped
their feline companions leaned more toward congeniality and that my presence
would not raise fur. I had not yet reached the Franklin intersection when I observed
two tabbies—one orange and white, the other pale gray. “Hello!” I called
to them. They did not answer and waited for me to approach their front steps. I
did so guardedly, praying I hadn’t provoked a fight with the block’s toughest
ferals. “I am Cattarina. I live in the Poe house at the end of the street.” I
waved my tail in the general direction of home.
   “Pleased
to make your acquaintance, friend,” the gray tom said. “I am George, and this
is Margaret.” He nodded to the orange and white tabby. “We live with Thaddeus
Beal.”
   “Welcome
to Green Street,” Margaret said. She had impossibly long whiskers. “You’ll find
a peaceful society in this neighborhood. We offer our blessings.”
   My ear
twitched. I could not fathom a non-violent gathering of felines, save for one
in the bastion of my mind. Immanuel Katt’s theories of utopia are stunning; sadly,
they remain out of reach. The only semi-peaceful society I’d met had been Big
Blue’s troop near the penitentiary, and even they weren’t above aggression. “If
I am welcome,” I countered, “then you won’t mind answering questions.”
   “Questions
delight the mind, miss,” George said. His dull coat had the color and density
of a thundercloud. I pictured a lightning strike in its midst.
   “Do you
know of the black cat?” I asked. “The one that was hanged this morning?”
   Margaret
sat and wrapped her ginger tail around her feet.“We know of him.”
   “Who
was his owner?”
   George looked
to Margaret then back to me.“Why do you want to know?” he asked.
   “It is
important to my companion,” I lied. While Eddy had an interest in the tom’s
death, I had become obsessed with it. “Please.”
   “Should
we tell her?” Margaret asked George.
   George blinked
his approval.
   “The
Butcher of Green Street,” she said. “He makes cats disappear.”











    [Картинка: img_5] 
   Jolley
Spirits
   MARGARET’S DECLARATION SOURED
MY stomach more than the wooly cheese I’d pilfered from the cooling cupboard yesterday.
“The Butcher of Green Street,” I repeated. “I gather sausage is not his
specialty.”
   “Unless
you mean cat sausage,” George said.
   “Surely
you speak in jest,” I said.
   “They
go in,” Margaret said with a tremor, “but they don’t come out.” She glanced
over her shoulder before speaking again. “The black cat disappeared into the
Butcher’s house around the quarter moon. Now he’s swinging from a tree. Draw
your own conclusions.”
   “You
said ‘They go in.’ Have there been
others?” I asked.
   “Yes. It
all started with the Water Giants.”
   I
flicked the end of my tail.“That is utter hyperbole.”
   “Hi-purr-bo-lee?” She cocked her head. “I have
never heard of it. But I amvery sure
of my facts. The Water Giants made the mistake of sleeping on the Butcher’s
doorstep one night. The next morning, they were gone. Just ask them if you
don’t believe me.”
   “If
they are gone,” I said, “how can I ask them?”
   “Precisely,”
George said with a sniff. “After that, other ferals vanished. Always near the
Butcher’s home. No one knows what he does with them, but I’ve heard rumors of a
cat cookery book—”
   “George!”
Margaret said. “Gossiping is most unseemly. Our Thaddeus would not approve.”
   George dipped
his head.
   Cat
cookery book? No matter how sorry I felt for the black feline, I would not
sacrifice my life to give meaning to his. The Poe household, namely Eddy,
depended on me, and getting ground into sausage would complicate matters. Moreover,
I have never been fond of mustard. And yet…curiosity, the cat, and all of that.
“If I wanted to see this human, where would I find him?” I asked.
   “A half
block down, across the street,” George said. “The one with petunias in the
window boxes. Don’t say we didn’t warn you, miss.”
   “I will
take your words to heart,” I said. “If anything, I now know which house to
avoid.”
   The
door to George and Margaret’s home opened, and Mr. Thaddeus Beal—a drably
clothed man with spectacles—summoned them with a kissy sound. George
dashed inside. Margaret hesitated. “Give up this pursuit before it’s too late,”
she said to me. “Promise you will, Cattarina.”
   “I
promise. Cat’s honor.” I waited for her to leave then started for home. Though
I longed to avenge the tom’s murder, I had met a villain too despicable to
hunt.Fancy a Leg of Manx tonight, dear?
With mint jelly? No, thank you. I’d much rather dine on Tortie Pot Pie. Cat
cookery book, indeed.
   As I
neared North Seventh, I noted a grey plume rising in the vicinity of home. This
new area heralded surprises at every turn. I trotted ahead and rounded the
corner, discovering the smoke’s source—the Poe residence. Scents of char
and kerosene wafted from the rear of the structure.
   Egad,
the house was on fire!
   Nothing
distracted Eddy from writing. Nothing. I envisioned him looking up from his
desk, pondering aloud about the warmth of his bedroom floor, and dipping his
pen to resume work. Muddy must have fallen asleep at the stove again! I leapt
over the picket fence and dashed toward what I feared would be a raging kitchen
fire. I collapsed with relief at the small blaze in the kitchen garden.
   Clad in
her brown checkedeverydaydress,
Sissy stood over the burning remnants of the rose print frock she’d worn to
market, tending the flames with a rake. Eddy stood next to her, arm around her
shoulder. A heap of stones had been piled beneath the morning glory vines in
the corner of the yard. The final resting place of the victim, I surmised.
   “Mother
said it was beyond repair, and Mother would know,” Sissy said.
   “I don’t
have the means to replace it,” he said, looking at the dress.
   “Do not
fret, Eddy,” she said. “I would give a hundred gowns to know his soul is at
peace. And now that he has a memorial,”—she gestured to the mound of
stones—“he will not be forgotten.”
   Eddy kissed
her forehead.“He willnever be
forgotten.”
   The
breeze lifted a cinder into the air. It popped and flashed, clinging to life, before
vanishing into the firmament.
   “You
are too good for this world, Virginia. Too good.” He tucked his thumbs in his
vest pockets. “I will buy you another dress when I can. In the meantime, I will
give the black cat a fine eulogy—a story of his own. Will that satisfy
you?”
   “Yes.
Very much.” She smiled, her face wan. “When will you begin?”
   “At
once,” Eddy said. He looked to me with lifted eyebrows. “Catters? Where have
you been?” He snapped his fingers. “Lunch can wait. We have work to do.”
   On our
way into the house, Eddy tripped on a nail head protruding from the threshold.“Don’t tell Muddy,” he said to me, “or she’ll be after me to fix it.”
   We
entered and climbed the winding staircase to his writing chamber on the middle
floor. Instead of officing in the parlor, as he’d done on Coates, he’d taken to
working in solitude. I believed this was for the better. Not only did the eastern
window capture more light, it looked out onto a splendid stretch of road. Whenever
the ink stopped flowing, he would stand, stretch, and watch the parade of
humanity. This gave himthe thrust to finish his work. I, too, loved the view. Swifts
would fly in at candle-light, pricking my ears with chatter, and roost inside the
chimneys of Spring Garden. I imagined Auntie Sass slinking along the rooftops,
hunting them into oblivion.
   Eddy lifted
the window sash, and I settled onto his desk to supervise the preparations. Two
pens he owned: one of common goose, which he used for hasty notes, the other of
crow, which he used for manuscripts, official correspondence, and so forth. The
crow offered a finer point that made writing in a small, neat hand easier. As
expected, he plucked the black quill from its wire holder, withdrew his
penknife from his pocket, and shaved the nib to his liking. The scraping lulled
me into a purr. Once he’d prepared the instrument, he uncorked the ink, a
blackish-brownish liquid that smelled of rust, and laid out a clean piece of paper,
cut the day before from a long scroll. The day’s writing could begin.
   He
dipped his pen and drew marks across the top of the page.“‘The Black Cat,’” he
said. “An obvious title but a fitting one, eh, Catters?”
   I hopped
on his shoulder and surveyed the work. The scrawl looked like a dribbling of
weak tea now but would soon dry to a strong, fine brown—the color of Eddy’s
hair. I meowed with approval and resumed my spot on the desk. He stroked my
back then sat forward to write, completing several lines before stopping again.
“Listen, Catters, and tell me if I have captured the requisite voice.” He took
up the paper and read aloud: “Forthe most wild, yet most homely narrative
which I am about to pen, I neither expect nor solicit belief. Mad indeed would
I be to expect it, in a case where my very senses reject their own evidence.
Yet, mad am I not—and very surely do I not dream.”
   I stretched
and yawned, curling my tongue. Life was much too comfortable to pursue a man
who made sausage of cats. Although something about the challenge piqued my
curiosity. I wondered if I had enough stamina to chase such a villain. Alas, I’d
regained some—not all—of the weight I’d lost last fall. Blasted pot
roast dinners. It was almost as if Muddywanted
me to eat them, the way she left them on the sideboard time and again. I rolled
on my back, exposing my ample mid-section. Eddy tickled my stomach with his quill,
and I batted the feather more out of obligation than interest. I shut my eyes
and waited for the pleasant scratch of goose nib on paper once again.
   Some period
afterward, light played across my eyelids. I awoke to find Eddy slumped in his
chair, the penknife—not the quill—between his fingers. He turned
the sharp object, catching a ray of sun with the blade. Any other day, his
fascination with the knife would have raised little concern. Today, however,
was not any other day, not with a one-eyed cat planted in the garden.
   “What
would possess a man, Cattarina? What?” He looked at me with pained expression.
“I could not fathom it, unless…” He placed the penknife in a leather case that
he tucked in his jacket pocket. “Come, Catters. Jolley Spirits awaits.”
   I accompanied
him out of concern, for I did not like Mr. Jolley, nor did I like the effect of
Mr. Jolley’s spirits on my companion. They dulled my companion’s wits, a fact apparent
to everyone but him. We descended the steps and entered the kitchen where he cobbled
together bread, cheese, and ham pulled from the cooling cabinet. He finished by
heaping the concoction with a generous portion of mustard and sour pickle.
   Sissy
poked her head into the room, embroidery hoop in hand.“I see you have an appetite,
my love.”
   “I have
a great thirst as well.”
   “For
water?”
   Eddy chuckled.
   “For
words?”
   Eddy did
not answer. He wrapped his sandwich in a kitchen cloth, folding and tying it
with great consideration. From the attention he gave the bundle, I would have
thought it no less important than a manuscript.
   Sissy’s
gaze fell to the floor. “When will you be back?”
   Eddy
tied the top of the cloth and headed for the back door.“Before dinner. I swear
it.” He held up his hand in oath. “Catters will keep me out of trouble. Do not
worry.”
   Sissy
regarded me, her jaw clenched. This winter, I had become not just her nursemaid
but also his. Like the morning glory vines in the back garden, Eddy and Sissy’s
woes grew in tangles, each pulling the other down, until the couple’s fate
became inseparably entwined: the sicker Sissy grew, the more broken Eddy became;
the more broken Eddy became, the sicker Sissy grew. It was enough to drive a
cat mad.
   “Very
well,” she said. “If you must.”
   ***
   Eddy
and I arrived at Jolley Spirits, a tavern on Spring Garden. Trimmed by a ripped
awning, the single-story eyesore sat amongst newer, taller edifices, and
had—of all things—a stable out back. The interior was no less squalid.
We took our usual table near the window. The air smelled faintly of horse dung,
a scent I attributed to someone’s boots. From the crumb-covered tabletop, I
assessed the crowd. Men with sooty faces—rowdies from the rail depot—had
gathered around the bar. They shouted and slapped one another’s backs in a
manner most aggressive, disturbing a table of dark-suited gentlemen in the
back. Despite occasional jeers from both sides, spirits flowed, and a war
between the camps seemed unlikely. I thought about starting one later for my
own amusement.
   Eddy untied
his kitchen bundle.“Sissy worries about me, Catters,” he said in a low voice.
“But it isI who should do the
worrying, don’t you think?” He lifted the sandwich to take a bite. “Virginia was
so…despondent when we left and over a trivial matter.” His face soured. “Curses,
I have lost my appetite again.” He shrouded his lunch with the cloth, laying it
to rest. “I am certain it is ‘The Black Cat.’”
   I
recognized these words from our writing session. Had he been referring to this
morning’s feline? Or his story? I couldn’t be sure. Either way, I was glad the tom’s
death still occupied his mind because it had yet to leave mine. I thought about
the killer—the Butcher of Green Street—while I groomed my haunches.
   “At any
rate, I cannot seem to—” Eddy stopped mid-sentence when Mr. Jolley, the
barkeep, arrived with a glass of port wine.
   “How is
my best customer?” Mr. Jolley asked. A hideous old man with fewer teeth than
fingers, he’d outlived most humans. He set the drink before Eddy and reached for
me with a spotted hand. Blue veins bulged beneath his thinning skin. I flattened
my ears and growled, letting the pitch rise tomatch my agitation. He heeded
the warning and withdrew. Common sense may have been his lone attribute. “Your
cat is most peculiar, Mr. Poe,” he said.
   Eddy slid
a coin across the table then took a draught of wine before speaking.“Peculiar,
yes.Most peculiar? Good sir, you have
not met my mother-in-law.”
   Mr.
Jolley chuckled, dabbing the corner of his mouth with his sleeve. His dark suit
smelled of cedar and dust.“I have seen Maria Clemm on the street, and she is a
fetching woman.”
   “Sheis rather good at retrieving,” Eddy
said.
   Mr.
Jolley’s chuckle turned into a belly laugh. “Oh, Mr. Poe, I beg you! Stop at
once!”
   “It is
all in jest,” Eddy said. “I could not do without dear Muddy. She is my
salvation.” He finished his wine and set the glass down with finality.
   He pointed
to the empty vessel.“Another?”
   Eddy
hesitated.
   “How is
your magazine coming?”
   “No
longer thePenn, it is theStylus, revived and restyled under
better auspices. And while thePioneer
and others like it have collapsed, theStylus
is in capable hands.”
   “Is
that right?” Mr. Jolley held onto the back of a nearby chair. “I read Mr. Clark
withdrew his support. Unless theSaturday
Museum prints lies these days.”
   Eddy
shifted in his seat.
   “Let me
get that refill,” Mr. Jolley said, hobbling away. “Good afternoon, Mr. Arnold!”
he shouted to a departing patron. “Give my best to Tabitha!”
   Mr. Arnold,
the cobbler of Franklin Street, sneered in reply. A coarse man with a bulbous
nose, he slumped more than walked. One could argue that his frame had been sewn
of wet burlap. And, dear me, his sun-worn skin needed polishing more than the boots
in his shop. When he passed our table, he jerked one of the empty chairs,
startling us both. I flattened my ears and hissed.“What are you looking at?”
he bellowed. “Well? Answer me!”
   “Nothing,
sir. I pride myself on minding my business,” Eddy said. He must have responded
on my behalf since Mr. Arnold had addressed me, not him.
   “People
shouldn’t bring animals into public houses.” He spat tobacco on the floor near
our table. “It’s not sanitary.” His crazed laughter lasted all the way out the
door. “It’s not sanitary!” he shouted again before crossing the street.
   “That fellow
is corned, Catters, from top to tail. No wonder Mrs. Arnold stays ill-humored.”
   In a
fashion, Mr. Jolley brought another glass of port. Once Eddy finished it, the
old man returned with yet another, walking more briskly than I would have guessed
his age would allow.
   “No,
Mr. Jolley,” Eddy said. He held up his hand in refusal. “I have had enough.”
   EvenI, humble cat that I am, understood his
answer. Mr. Jolley, however, did not, or rather pretended he did not. With a
gummy smile, he set the drink in front of my companion and left. The barkeep
gave me many reasons to hate him, but this bested them all. Josef, the server
at Shakey House Tavern, always heeded Eddy’s wishes. I’d even seen him refuse Eddy
when my friend’s gait grew uncertain or his speech slurred. Not Mr. Jolley. He cared
more for coins than people.
   Eddy sipped
the blood-hued liquid and watched a couple on the street. The youngsters strolled
past the tavern windows, elbows linked beneath a shared parasol. How rosy their
cheeks; how gay their steps! The woman laughed with nary a cough and tugged her
beau toward an oyster vendor across the way. Eddy’s gaze fell to his wine
glass. When the rising chatter of patrons interrupted his contemplation, he took
the penknife from his pocket again.
   As he
toyed with the blade, his expression changed from one of concentration to one
of despair, signaling the return of his melancholy. As they’d done so many
times before, clouds overtook him, dampening his spirits with unremitting
drizzle. This came as no surprise. One cannot hide from the tempest when it
resides in one’s heart. Yet changing the weather was as easy—or as
hard—as stoking his imagination. I’d learned this duringour last
adventure.
   “What
state of mind must a man possess to commit this morning’s atrocity?” Eddy
placed the object on the table next to me for my perusal. I sniffed it,
detecting the scent of crow—nothing out of the ordinary. “An enraged
state, an altered state…” He picked up the glass again and held it to the
sunlight, casting a dappled reflection on the table. “I still do not know how
anyone with a right mind could kill a cat,” he said to me.
   Kill a cat.
   Grasping
tail in teeth, I worked on a cocklebur I’d picked up in the market. Constable
Harkness wouldn’t likely jail a cat killer. But tracking down the murderer and
involving Eddy in the hunt would blow away the storm. Sissy, too, might be
cheered by our exertions. Nevertheless, one thing prevented my endorsement: the
cat cookery book. I stood and stretched, anticipating the arrival of Mr.
Jolley. To banish the pall over the Poe family, I would immerse us in the
mystery of the hanged cat.
   As I
sharpened my claws on the table, I questioned whether or not I had the speed
and tenacity to bring down a human again. Winter feasting had given me a
roundish, fattish shape, akin to a lump of dough—a detriment to fieldwork.
If I couldn’t shake my sloth, I might end up on the Butcher’s plate next to boiled
turnips. The floorboards vibrated. I turned to find the old raisin nearing with
more blasted refreshment.
   I
crouched.
   “Here
you are, Mr. P—”
   I flew
at Mr. Jolley’s face, scratching and clawing with my own set of penknives. He
dropped the glass—my objective—and held his arm aloft. This
protected his rheumy eyes and little else. With unusual vengeance, I latched
onto the limb, shredding the thin skin of his elbow like newspaper. He would not
serve another drink to Eddy tonight, maybe not even tomorrow. I withdrew and
waited by the door for a swift exit.
   Mr.
Jolley slipped and skated on the bloody port pooling underfoot, unable to gain
his balance.“Get out!” he screamed. “You and that damnable cat, get out!”
   The
rail yard rowdies and the gentleman laughed, united in his ridicule.
   Eddy
grabbed his penknife and tucked it away.“Shall I come back tomorrow?”
   “Out!”
Mr. Jolley clutched his injured arm and fell into a chair.
   We departedfull chisel, leaving Jolley Spirits behind.
Cookery book be damned. Catching the Butcher would be no problem for a cat like
me.











    [Картинка: img_6] 
   Cat
Cookery for Beginners
   I ACCOMPANIED EDDY AS far as
our front garden and waited for him to enter before skittering back to Green
Street. With extreme care, I approached the house with the window boxes—a
little down, a little across from the Franklin cut-through—stopping short
at the neighboring brownstone. From the holly bushes next door, I surveyed the Butcher’s
lair. His bottom floor windows hung open, and the curtains billowed in and out
with the draft. Trim garden, new paint, clean walkway—I found nothing awry,
save for wilting petunias. The dwelling looked innocuous enough. But then, so had
the Glass Eye Killer’s, and the dangers that lurked behind his door had been
genuine.
   Margaret’s
caution returned as I slunk into the open. “He makes cats disappear,” she’d
said. I dismissed it and hopped the low wrought iron fence surrounding the
Butcher’s property. A cage large enough for a parrot sat to the right of the
front door, but the contraption was empty, lacking perch, seed cup, and,
chiefly, a feathered occupant. A horse and carriage rolled by on the
cobblestones,clackety-clack,
startling me. When I faced the house again, a figure loomed in the window
beyond the curtain veil.
   I
froze.
   When my
legs could hold their position no longer, I disappeared into a cluster of
zinnias, stirring a patch of butterflies. The Butcher would leave at some point
and walk by the flower patch, giving me access to his ankle. A well-placed
strike to this area would incapacitate him. I flexed my claws. Once he fell, his
eye would be mine. I swatted the last remaining butterfly, scraping it into
paste. Street justice was a concept most familiar to an ex-feral like me. And
then I thought of Eddy and the scorn he would heap upon this act of retribution.
   In the
twitch of a whisker, I’d sunk to a place unbefitting a cat of my status, a cat
who cohabitated with an esteemed man of letters. I lowered my chin to my paws. While
the Butcher deserved a punishment equal to one he’d doled out, I would bring him
to his knees and nothing more.
   The hinges
cried as the front door swung open. My stomach tightened.“Heeeere kitty,
kitty,” the Butcher called. His voice cracked from strain or disuse, I could
not tell which. This much I knew: the zinnia patch had grown smaller. Or maybe I
had grown larger. Both were possible. “Heeeere kitty, kitty.” He descended the stone
steps to the garden.
   The
flowers obstructed my view of his face, though from his gait I judged him to be
a man of advanced years. Considering my success with Mr. Jolley, I had less to
fear than I’d originally thought. I unsheathed my claws and lifted my paw to assault
the oldster. I would be home for tea.
   “There’s
a pretty kitty,” he said. He stopped at the flower patch, casting me in a
crooked shadow. It was the man with the bent spine.
   I spat
in terror, not at his outstretched hands but at the object between them—a
net.
   ***
   The
struggle had been epic—a vicious roiling of claws and teeth and tail—and
one, I dare say, worthy of Eddy’s pen, yet it belonged to me alone. Once the Butcher
threw the net, he stood aside and let me wind deeper into the ropes until even
my whiskers could not wiggle. What a sight I must have been—Philadelphia’sonly ball of yarn with a cat inside. After I surrendered, he scooped me up and dumped
me into the large birdcage next to the front door. TheGazette lined the bottom of the prison, completing the indignity. What
next? A cup of seeds?
   The
Butcher knelt and appraised me. A wave of white hair and beard covered much of
his face, though his eyes remained bright. The faded green of winter grass,
they shone beneath his hooded lids, suggesting a quick mind. He stood and picked
up my cage with some effort.“Oh, me, you’re a heavy thing, aren’t you? They’re
feeding you well.”
   He took
me inside where he placed me on the kitchen table next to a cutting board of
diced onion and carrot. A pot of water boiled on the stove. Queasiness replaced
hunger when I realized the scoundrel meant to serve me for dinner. I imagined
myself, tied up like a pot roast, surrounded by vegetables. In a panic, I pawed
the latch to free myself.
   The
Butcher bent the wire hook and fastened the cage door tighter.“Not to worry,
pretty kitty.” He chuckled. “I’ll take you out when it’s time to eat.”
   I settled
into the corner of my enclosure and watched as he retrieved a leather-bound notebook
and a stick of charred wood from the cupboard. He sat down at the table,
flipped to a new page in his book, and started to sketch. I assumedI was the subject of his portrait since a
handsome cat with patches of light and dark fur and the most exquisite ears took
shape beneath the charcoal. To finish, he scribbled a series of notes beneath
the drawing. I could not read them, of course…I swished my tail. Great Cat
Above! I had been entered into the cookery book!











    [Картинка: img_7] 
   The
Water Giants
   HORRIFIED BY THE CAT cookery
book, I lurched against the cage, thinking to knock it sideways and break it
open. The Butcher responded by depositing my prison beneath the table and
draping a large kitchen cloth over its top. I thumped my tail. I was a cat,
nay, atortoiseshell cat, and I would
not be hidden away like a noisy parakeet. There I keened with great volume:yoooow, yoooow, yoooow, yoooow. I hoped George
and Margaret would heed the call since they—not Eddy—lived close
enough to hear it.
   “Hush
now, pretty kitty,” he said. “Just a little longer.”
   The
Butcher’s admonishment mattered not, and I continued to wail, stopping only when
he banged lid and pot together. Alarmed by the noise, I ceased and prayed for deliverance.
I imagined Eddy at the kitchen table, drinking tea and eating gingersnaps, his
shirtfront full of crumbs. With the strong connectionbetween us, my visions
usually heldsome veracity of mood,
if not manner, so it jarred me to picture him joking with Sissy and Muddy,
giving no thought to my whereabouts. Who could blame him after my spat with Mr.
Jolley? I crouched in the corner, remaining quiet lest the Butcher bang another
pot.
   Come
sundown, the Poe household would suffer if I weren’t there to help Muddy with
the leftovers, warm Sissy’s lap, or coax another page of writing from Eddy. The
Butcher tossed another log into the woodstove. Come sundown,I would suffer. I had but one option
left: wait until the cage door opened and come out fighting like Auntie Sass.
If the old manwere to make a meal of
me, he would earn it.
   For an
agonizing period, I listened to the clink of teacups and the clatter of
cupboard doors as the Butcher prepared for the feast. The cadence of his
footfall created music upon the floorboards that would have soothed me in
brighter circumstances. Now the vibrations jarred my muscles, plucking them like
the strings of Sissy’s old harp. Just when I’d become accustomed to his steps, they
increased in speed, traversed the kitchen, and faded from hearing. “Goodbye,
Silas! Goodbye, Samuel!” he called.
   Silasand Samuel? To whom did these names belong? The Butcher’s offspring? The
wondering petrified me more than the knowing.
   The
front door opened and closed.
   The
house fell quiet, save for the crackle of the woodstove.
   Clever
Butcher. He’d said these names as a ruse to keep me inside my cage. He hadn’t
counted on my tenacity. I reached my paw through the bars to try the latch
again. The wire held fast. A second and third try yielded disappointment as
well. I’d just begun to study the lock when paws padded toward me. Silas and
Samuel? I ducked low to see beneath the kitchen cloth, but dash-it-all, the
fabric reached the floor. I sniffed through the bars, detecting toms of middle
age, perhaps from the same litter. If they supported the Butcher as I did Eddy,
crisis had just given way to calamity.
   “Should
we say hello, Silas?” the first tom asked.
   “It
would be rude not to, Samuel,” the other said.
   Silence.
   “Well,
aren’t you going to say something?” Samuel said.
   “Oh, I
thoughtyou were going to say
something,” Silas said.
   A
sneeze. More silence.
   “Won’tsomeone speak?” I said.
   A large
cat ducked beneath the kitchen cloth. Dark and light gray stripes graced his fur,
and tufts of white adorned his chest and underbelly, giving his coat a dapper suit-and-shirtfront
pattern. Large did not begin to describe him. I had never seen a cat of such
grandiose proportion. And his ears! Fur tipped their ends, swooping them even
higher than mine, like those of a lynx. Had I not been scared, I would have
been envious.“Hello,” he said to me. “I am Samuel.”
   “Please,”
I begged him, “let me out before the man comes back and cooks me.”
   Samuel cocked
his head.“Cooks you?”
   Silas joined
us beneath the cloth. His markings were almost identical to Samuel’s, save for
white-tipped toes. “Cooks you?” Silas repeated. “No, no, no. He does not cook cats.
He has another end in mind. He’s going to—”
   The
front door opened and closed.
   “Our Robert
returns,” Samuel said to Silas. “To the parlor, brother. At once!”
   The two
toms vanished from view.
   “Go?
Wait! What fate? What fate!” I shouted after them.
   Two
humans entered the kitchen, one with the gait of the old man, one with a
lighter step. Splendid. A dinner party. With renewed vigor, I reached a paw
through the bars and tried to bat the lock open one last time. When that
failed, I sank my teeth into the metal. Imagine my surprise when a hand
snatched the cloth from my cage.
   “There
you are, Cattarina!” Sissy said. Her face burned red beneath her bonnet. The
walk to Green Street had winded her. “I’m glad you are safe.”
   Sissy,
dear Sissy! I yowled to state my displeasure. Then I yowled again, varying the
intonation to let her know I unabashedly approved of her presence. The Butcher pulled
my enclosure into the open and set it on the tabletop again. He motioned Sissy
to a chair and took one for himself, placing his leather-bound cookery book on
the table.
   “I
can’t thank you enough, Mr. Eakins,” Sissy said. She untied the strings of her
bonnet and removed it. “Cattarina wanders off with some frequency, causing my
husband undue worry.” She smoothed her hair into place.
   “You do not worry?”
   “No.”
She winked at me. “Cattarina is a first-rate gadabout.”
   “In any
event, I’m glad to be of service. To all cats.” He wiggled a finger inside my
cage.
   It took
some restraint, but I didn’t bite him. Doing so now would complicate matters,
as it had done with Mr. Jolley. So I sniffed his hand instead. Great Cat Above!
The Butcher’s scent varied from the one on the rope, which meant he hadn’t hung
the black tom. I had been so preoccupied that I hadn’t noticed before. While
this conclusion reassured me, I had, nevertheless, drawn it from parrot prison.
   “Cats
are your business, aren’t they, Mr. Eakins?” Sissy wiped a bit of sweat from
her neck with a handkerchief. “That is what I heard on the street today.”
   “You
heard right.” His eyes crinkled at the corners. “Tea?”
   “Yes,
please.”
   Tea? The woman had lost her faculties.
Could she not fathom my predicament? I was a captive, for kitty’s sake.
   The
Butcher—or Mr. Eakins?—crossed to the cook stove and poured hot
water from the once-boiling pot into two waiting cups. He returned with their refreshments,
taking a seat once more. “I have no cream or sugar, Mrs. Poe. Please accept my
apologies. My meager income is spent on my…business, as you say.”
   Sissy
took the cup from him and placed it on the table.“That’s a lovely book you
showed me earlier. The one with Cattarina’s sketch.”
   “Oh,
me, yes,” he said. “It’s taken years of meticulous work.” He, too, set his
teacup aside and reached for his notebook. “Every cat I rescue gets a page. I
sketch their picture and make notes about their health, the location in which I
discovered them, any distinguishing marks, and soon before I find them a new
home. It’s quite consuming. Philadelphia is overrun with the creatures.” He
opened the book to my entry and handed it to Sissy with a shaky hand. “Now that
I’m too old to work for Mr. Lansing—I was a law clerk, you know—I
spend my days on this. It keeps me from thinking too much about Mrs. Eakins,
God rest her soul.”
   “So the
cat hanging this morning…”
   “Shocking.”
   She flashed
her teeth.“You had nothing to do with it!”
   “Dear,
me, no. In fact, just talking about it upsets my stomach. I feel partly to
blame.”
   “Why?
Because despite saving so many strays you couldn’t save the one?”
   Mr.
Eakins hesitated.“As I said, Mrs. Poe, I’d rather not talk about it.”
   “You
have done enough good in this world. Let that be of comfort.” She thumbed
through the book, perusing a few sketches before shutting it. “Mr. Eakins, I’m
glad we crossed paths.”
   “As am
I. I knew the tortoiseshell belonged to you because I saw you out with her this
morning. She’s a pretty thing, isn’t she?” He unhitched the latch and opened
the cage door.
   I flew onto
Sissy’s lap, anchoring my claws into the brown checked fabric of her dress.
Sweet freedom at last! She laid her hand on my back to comfort me, and I
settled at once into the folds of her skirt, shifting to an uneasy calm. To
make my position clear, I turned my ears back and fixed the old man with a stare.
I would not suffer the cage again.
   Before
long, Silas and Samuel trotted into the room, their fat tails bobbing behind
them. Sissy touched her collarbone.“Mr. Eakins, those are the largest felines
I have ever seen. They are as big as bobcats. And their tails! Why, they look
like feather dusters!” She replaced his book on the table and leaned forward to
study the pair.
   “They
are from Maine, Mrs. Poe. Do you like them?” When she nodded, Mr. Eakins added,
“They are called Coon Cats. If you think they’re special now, just wait.” He retrieved
a bucket of well water from the bottom of the cupboard and set it in front of
Silas and Samuel. They took no interest. “Prepare to be fascinated,” he told
Sissy. At this, he produced a jug cork from his pocket and floated it on top of
the liquid, giving it a spin to set it moving.
   To my
bewilderment, Silas and Samuel dipped their paws into the bucket and played
with the cork, batting it as one might a fish. Before long, water covered the
floor, even dampening their tails with the vile liquid. I shuddered at the thought
of it between my toes. How much grooming would it take to put them to rights
again? When my paws tingled at the thought, I licked them. Why, Silas and
Samuel might not even be cats at all. They might be— I looked again to the
brothers. I had found the Water Giants mentioned by George and Margaret. Mr.
Thaddeus Beal’s companions had been right, or partly right, about the cookery
book as well. But they had been wrong about the old man. The Butcher was nothing
more than a false goliath built of rumor and dread.
   “Hello,”
Samuel said to me. He shook the water from his paws and hopped to Mr. Eakin’s
lap, engulfing his companion in a mat of fur and bones.
   Sissy
and Mr. Eakins continued their conversation, which we ignored.
   “Why
didn’t you tell me before that Mr. Eakins meant no harm?” I asked Samuel.
   “No one
is ever in danger here,” he said. “I thought you knew that.” He looked to Silas.
The other tom had fished the cork from the bucket and was chewing it to crumbles.
“She didn’t know, brother,” Samuel said to him. “Brother?”
   Silas
turned his back to us and finished killing the cork.
   “Don’t
mind him,” Samuel said to me. “Once you do away with all the mice, that leaves
little else to hunt.”
   “The
feeling is familiar.” I thought about telling him of my escapades but decided
against it. The City of Brotherly Love had room for only one feline
ratiocinator. “Mr. Eakins took you in and gave you a home?”
   “Yes, a
very good one. We don’t leave much. He thinks it best that we stay inside. But we
sneak out on occasion. Mostly at night.”
   “And
the book he keeps?”
   “It’s a
record of all the feral cats he’s rescued over the seasons.” Samuel jumped to
the table and pawed the notebook open. “There are many pictures. Too many to
count.”
   I
joined him and looked over his shoulder at the sketches.“And what becomes of
them?”
   “He
finds them homes, of course.”
   “What
do you know about the hanged cat this morning?”
   Samuel crooked
his tail.“What hanged cat? We do not get out much.”
   With Samuel’s
next swipe, the book fell open to the middle. A tom with luxurious fur and a
white mark on his chest stared back at me from the page, his coat the color of…Midnight. My old pal from Rittenhouse did
not come from noble lineage, as he’d once said. He’d been born feral, like me,
the cad.
   Sissy picked
me up and laid me over her shoulder like a fox stole.“Thank you again, Mr.
Eakins. I don’t know how I can repay your kindness.”
   “You
have repaid it by giving Cattarina a good home.” He showed us to front the
door.
   Samuel followed,
scampering behind Sissy.“What was the black cat’s name?” I asked him. “The one
with the white mark on his chest?”
   “Mr.
Eakins named him Crow because he was as black as—”
   “Yes, how
fitting,” I said. This very afternoon, I would confront Midnight about his lies.
He would soon eat an uncomfortable portion of his namesake.











    [Картинка: img_8] 
   RittenhouseRedux
   WHAT NERVE MIDNIGHT HAD,
masquerading as a house-born cat when he’d sprung from the gutter like me. Our relationship
commenced last fall when I was but a fledgling crime solver. I’d tracked my
quarry, the Glass Eye Killer, as far as Rittenhouse Square before running out
of clues and ideas. That’s when I happened upon Midnight—a chance meeting
that led to, I am loath to admit, an infatuation. He dazzled me with kittenhood
tales of velvet pillows, everlasting tuna, and silken collars, and in my
naiveté, I believed every word. Having spent my formative years as a stray,
living in a wooden crate behind Osgood’s Odd Goods, I was in no position to
judge the veracity of his stories. Looking back, his proclivity for thefthad hinted at a less than fortuitous
upbringing. I’d just been too enamored to notice.
   As the
omnibus turned the corner of North 9th onto Spring Garden, I thought
of the ancient proverb: scratch me once, shame on you; scratch me twice, shame
on me. I would not be scarred by Midnight again. The long four-horse carriage stopped
at the curb near my paws.
   “Afternoon,
Miss Puss,” Mr. Coal said from the driver’s perch. His top hat swallowed his
small head, and the size difference caused the hat to wobble when he spoke.
“You’re looking well today. Catch any good mice lately?” I did not know Mr. Coal’s
true name. Rather, I’d assigned it based on his route. He worked the black line,
Mr. Goldenrod worked the yellowish line, Mr. Sky worked the blue line and so
forth. Endearing myself to the city’s omnibus drivers had been easy; a
plaintive mew, a blink of my eyes, and they were mine, present company
included. “Mind your step,” he said, working the door lever.
   I boarded
the horse-bus and walked between a preponderance of legs, looking for a seat. After
realizing the joys of transportation last autumn, I became a public transit
devotee. Yes, yes, the cobblestones rattled a body, tail to teeth. But, oh, the
convenience! The journey to Rittenhouse by paw would have taken until sundown,
and I had neither the patience nor the stamina to see it through. I found a
seat next to a bespectacled woman with a pheasant plume on her bonnet. The slender
brown feathers fluttered in the open window behind her as the carriage lurched
forward. Despite the gaiety of her hat, however, the woman’s face had all the
charm of a pitted prune.
   She
leaned out of the window and shouted to Mr. Coal,“Driver, why does the cat
ride free? I demand to know, where’sher
dime?”
   “I asked
her for fare once, missus.” Mr. Coal’s voice floated in through the window. “She
tried to carve me like a Sunday ham. But you go right ahead and get the money from
her. I’d be much obliged.”
   “Dear
me,” the woman muttered. She rose and took a new seat, squeezing between two gentlemen
in the rear of the coach. This suited me, and I settled into the rhythm of the
horses’ steps. By and by, their cadence calmed me, lessening my need for blood.
I would engage Midnight in a battle of wits, not claws, I decided. It took two
transfers to reach my destination, but I made it to Rittenhouse near teatime.
   I
yowled to be let off and disembarked, taking in the familiar smell of the place.
The odor of limestone and new construction prompted memories, both good and
bad. I could not say I missed this neighborhood, not as I did Fairmount. I set out
for Midnight’s imposing townhome, reaching it several blocks later. Climbing
the steps the wide stone porch, I began a campaign of vocalizations until a
small child answered my call. Her blonde curls sprang from her head like a
bird’s nest. If memory served, this was Sarah, the miniature mistress of the
house. In her arms, she carried a baby swaddled in a tapestry shawl with black
fringe all around.
   The
girl knelt and patted me on the head, giving me a peek inside the bundle she
carried. My first assessment had been incorrect. She held not a baby but a large
grey kitten with a shiny ribbon tied round her neck. The tabby’s permanent
teeth poked jaggedly through her gums, as if they hadn’t had an opportunity to
grow in yet.
   “You’re cute,” Sarah said to me. “Do you
have a home? Would you like to come in? We’re playing house, and Lovie needs a sissy.”
She bounced the kitten-baby in her arms.
   Sissy? Could she have met
Mrs. Poe? I doubted it.“I am looking for Midnight,” I said to the kitten.
“Does he still live here?”
   “For the
time being.”
   “Then
will you get him for me?”
   “He is
napping,” the kitten said with a touch of boredom.
   “He is
a cat,” I said. “He isalways
napping, you supercilious scrap of fur. Now retrieve him at once, or I will reach
into that blanket and—”
   “Cattarina?”
Midnight padded onto the porch. Sunlight glistened on his long black fur, lending
him a regal air I found irresistible, even today. He still wore the blue ribbon
round his neck, the one I remembered from our last visit, but it had frayed at
the edges.
   “Oh,”
Sarah said, “she’s come foryou,handsome
boy.” She leapt to her feet and sang, “Midnight’s got a sweetheart. Midnight’s
got a sweetheart.” She skipped into the house with her kitten-baby. As the door
swung shut, the grey fur ball gave me a direct stare, ears tipped sideways.
What insolence.
   “A matched
pair,” I said to Midnight. “Good riddance.”
   “Sarah
used to dote on me, until Lovie showed up,” he said to me. “But enough about
them. Let’s talk about you and where you’ve been the last six moons.” He sat on
his hindquarters and puffed his chest fur, displaying the white patch over his
breastbone—the most glaring difference between him and the murdered cat. “I
tried to visit you last winter, but your pal at Eastern State
Penitentiary—”
   “Big
Blue?”
   “Yes,
that’s him. He couldn’t say where you’d gone.”
   I
turned my nose to the sky.“You kept busy with other mollies, I am certain.”
   “None
like you, Cattarina.”
   I
paused to consider my strategy, settling on Circle and Pounce.“Perhaps my
charm comes from a feral upbringing.”
   “Maybe.”
   “You
and I are different, aren’t we, Midnight? You have never known the hardships of
street life. I, on the other hand, know them too well.” I circled him, treading
with slow, soft steps.
   “Well…yes.
But don’t feel bad. Not everyone is fed from a silver spoon at birth.”
   “And
what, pray tell, came on your silver spoon?”
   “Oh,
you know…the usual.”
   “Minced
lamb? Creamed tuna? Bacon drippings?” I circled tighter.
   “Of
course.”
   “Ha!” I
spat. “Lie upon lie upon lie!”
   “What
are you talking about?”
   I faced
him, hackles raised.“Why didn’t you tell me you were born a stray, Midnight?
Or should I call you Crow?”
   His
pale eyes shone bright, twin moons against his dark fur.“H-how did you find
out?”
   “Silas
and Samuel, my new neighbors.” I walked to the edge of the stoop and wrapped my
tail around me. “I am sure you are acquainted with their caretaker, Mr.
Eakins.”
   “Yes, I
know Mr. Eakins. If not for him, I would probably be dead by now.”
   Like
the cat in the tree. I dismissed the thought.“Then why did you hide the truth,
particularly when we share the same heritage? To humiliate me?”
   “What?
No! To impress you.” He joined me on the top stair. “Therehave been other mollies, Cattarina, but none with your…fire.”
   “Ido
have fire, don’t I?” I unwrapped my tail and cast it lazily upon the steps.
   “Yes,”
he said. “Enough to burn down the whole of Philadelphia.”
   “And my
ears. Do you like them? I think they are my best feature.”
   “They
are, without a doubt, your best feature.”
   We brushed
cheeks. All was forgiven.
   “So you
came all the way to Rittenhouse to catch me in a lie?” Midnight said. “I’m flattered.”
   “No, of
course not,” I countered. Many untruths had been told this afternoon; I did not
mind adding to their number. “My purpose lies with another stray, hanged this
very morning near Green Street. To find the tom’s executioner, I must learn his
identity. So I am speaking to as many of our kind as possible in the hope that
someone knows something. He looked a little like you but all black. On the small,
scrawny side with a single orange eye. I shan’t tell you about the other eye.”
   Midnight
swallowed.“When you say orange, do you mean pumpkin or copper?”
   “I
don’t see what difference—”
   “Please!”
   “Very
well, copper-ish.”
   “If it’s
who I think it is, the cat’s name is Snip. I hadn’t thought about him in…” He
stared at a passing wagon filled with anthracite. “Well, it’s been ages. We met
during our stay with Mr. Eakins. The old man placed me in a home first, and I
never thought about him or that old life until today.” He sighed. “Funny little
tom. Always worked for the laugh. He ran loops around the Coon Cats. Loved to spill
their water dish and watch them play in the mess. He wasquite the entertainer.” Midnight faced me, his eyes narrowed. “I
hope you find who killed him, Cattarina.”
   “As do
I.” I arose and paced the stoop. “The black cat— I mean, Snip’s death has
proved most discomforting to Sissy, the mistress of Poe House. And my Eddy can
scarcely think of anything else. I am hunting for them, you see, as well as Snip.”
   “Now
who’s the liar, Cattarina?” Midnight said. “I see the excitement in your tail.”
   I
looked back at the aforementioned item and found it sticking straight in the
air. I lowered it, dusting the limestone.“Very well. Itis exhilarating to hunt for big game. But my family is no less the
reason. Nor is retribution for a fallen brother.”
   “Maybe
I can help,” he said. “When you called on your neighbors, Silas and Samuel, did
you happen to see a large leather-bound book in their home?”
   “The
cookery book?”
   Midnight
cocked his head.
   “Never
mind. I know of it.”
   “Midnight!”
Sarah screeched from the front hall. “Let’s play hopscotch!” The sound of her
voice flattened Midnight’s ears. It had a similar effect on me, driving me back
to the steps.
   “Mr.
Eakins scribbles things inside it,” he said quickly.
   “That’s
what humans do,” I said. “It’s how they communicate. Though I cannot read the
marks, they are of great importance to Eddy.”
   “It’s
possible Mr. Eakins wrote about Snip’s new owners in the book.” The door opened,
banging against the inside wall. Sarah snatched Midnight under the ribcage, his
back legs dangling. “Find Snip’s entry, and find your answers,” he wheezed. “Charmed
to see you, Cattarina. Do come ag—”
   The
door slammed, cutting our conversation short. Fiddlesticks. I longed to heed
his advice, except the memory of this morning’s capture troubled me. Then I had
to overcome the small problem of my illiteracy, at least in the ways of human
writing. Even if I located the book, its contents would be indecipherable. I
arched my back, releasing the crick in my spine, and left for the omnibus stop.
   The carriage
trip home gave me an opportunity to reflect on Midnight’s advice, enough so
that when I reached Spring Garden, I’d talked myself into visiting Mr. Eakins. Heading
north, I reached the Butcher’s dwelling and climbed to his kitchen windowsill. I
peered through the glass. The old man sat at the dining table, charcoal twig in
hand, doodling in his leather-boundcat-pendium.
Dash it all. Before I could snoop for clues, Mr. Eakins would have to set his
drawing aside, a difficult task given the allure of the feline form. I watched him
a while longer, fascinated by the movement of his hand on the paper. Eddy
usually frowned as he worked; I think it helped him. But Mr. Eakins smiled—a
fool’s grin, toothy and without reason—as he sketched. The task consumed
him such that the folly of his Coon Cats passed unnoticed.
   Behind
him, Silas and Samuel crept to the sideboard where they plundered a near-empty soup
pot. The brothers took turns, each allowing the other a few licks of broth. It
was a polite affair until Silas—in a fit of gluttony—butted Samuel
out of the way, jumped into the vessel, and upended himself by accident. His
back legs punched the air as he tried to extract himself from the stew he’d
gotten himself into.Stew. I twitched
my whiskers, pleased with the pun. Samuel elected to escape trouble and dashed
into the parlor out of view.
   Mr.
Eakins laid down his twig and closed his book. When he rose to help Silas, he
brushed the tablecloth with his leg, revealing the cage hidden beneath it. I could
not be an inmate of parrot prison again! Terrified, I leapt to the ground and
ran straight home. There had to be another way to help Snip.











    [Картинка: img_9] 
   For
Sale: One Muse
   “THAT IS NO WAY to hammer a
nail,” Muddy said. She stood under the western eave, surveying her son-in-law’s
handiwork. Eddy, meanwhile, had removed one of his shoes and was using it to chastise
the threshold. He brought it down repeatedly on the board, much to Muddy’s
consternation. “You’ll never fix it,” she said.
   I
approached them, fresh from Mr. Eakins’s house, to observe the undertaking.
   “Iwill fix it,” Eddy said. “You will see.”
He raised his shoe again, laces swaying, and smacked a protruding nail head. Everyone
in Poe House had either tripped over the errant barb or snagged clothing on it
since moving here this spring. Though physical labor disagreed with my
companion, he persisted in amanner most enthusiastic. Sweat formed on his
brow, and his hair flopped forward into his eyes.Smack! Smack! With every blow of his shoe, he grunted.
   “I told
you,” Muddy said. “It will never work. You need something harder.”
   “Your
head, perhaps,” Eddy muttered under his breath. He struck the nail again.
   “A shoe
is no substitute for a hammer,” she said.
   “We
don’thave a hammer, Mother,” Sissy
called from the open kitchen door. “And the Poyners aren’t home, so we can’t
borrow one from them.”
   “Then tell
your husband to buy one.” Muddy crossed her arms over her stomach and addressed
Eddy. “I’m sure the Irishman deals on credit.” She turned and disappeared into
the house.
   Eddy
stood and slipped his foot into his shoe.“Catters, old girl, why don’t we
visit Fitz together?” He reached to stroke my back, releasing a puff of fur. “Muddy
won’t let up until the nail is fixed. What’s more, ‘The Black Cat’ isn’t coming
along like I’d hoped. I think fresh air and a trip to the store would help with
both. But we’d better hurry. He’s closing soon.”
   We journeyed
down Minerva, the westward sun on our faces. As we walked, I recalled the day’s
events: a murder, a catnapping, a romantic rekindling. Why, I’d had enough
adventure to last the summer! I glanced at Eddy, his dark silhouette a comfort.
The life he provided was thrilling enough; did I need to seek diversion
elsewhere? No, in this happy moment, I was content to leave the affairs of the
black cat to the black cat himself.
   The
feeling lasted until we reached the sassafras tree.
   Snip’s
body had long since been removed, yet sorrow marred the courtyard, thickening
the air like chowder. I pictured the little tom, running circles around Silas
and Samuel, working, as Midnight said, for the laugh. I swished my tail. I
could not overlook his murder now that I’d come to know him. But I needed to
find a way to help that didn’t involve Mr. Eakins.
   Eddy entered
Fitzgerald Hardware with a spry hop. Humans were a pitiable species, but I
envied their dull senses at times like these. I stepped inside the narrow store,
pausing behind my friend. Glass cases stocked with an assortment of nails,
metal fittings, and hinges lined the space. Atop the cabinetry, more items had
been arranged: lanterns, tin funnels, boxes of gunpowder, downspouts, cast iron
spiders…almost too much to behold. We found Mr. Fitzgerald in the back, dusting
a row of pot-bellied stoves. The floorboards creaked, announcing our arrival.
   “Afternoon,
Mr. Poe.” Mr. Fitzgerald laid down his duster and winked at me. “If you’ve come
for thecraic about the cat, sir, I
don’t know a thing about it.”
   My ear
flicked at the mention ofcat.
   “No,
Mr. Fitzgerald, this call is strictly business.” Eddy clasped his hands behind
his back. “I’m in need of a hammer. Do you carry them?”
   “I have
claw, mallet, sledge, tinner’s… What kind are you looking for?”
   “The
kind that punishes nails.”
   “I have
just the one.” The man stepped behind a long glass case and pointed to a row of
tools inside. I joined the men, hopping to the counter to peruse the objects
below me. I was no expert, but they looked better at pounding nails than Eddy’s
shoe. The men spoke at length, exhausting the topics ofhammers andhardheaded women.
Since I did not think Mr. Fitzgerald sold the second, I decided the implements
in the case must be the first. I had no interest in either. My attention
drifted, settling on an attractive box of twine balls at the end of the counter.
   And
then I saw it.
   The now-familiar
rope hung on a peg near the pot-bellied stoves. I traversed the cabinetry and studied
the cord’s composition:brown and tan
jute, the former dyed with a bitter solution that smelled of walnuts, the
latter left au natural.Great Cat Above, I’d located the source of the murder
weapon! I narrowed my eyes at Mr. Fitzgerald and watched him share a joke of
some sort with Eddy. The two men laughed. It baffled me that a human of gentle
demeanor could commit such a cruelty. But Mr. Fitzgerald, indeed, had been the
one to kill the black cat.I yowled to catch Eddy’s attention.
   “We
will leave soon, Catters,” he said. He gave the shopkeeper a somber look. “Now
about your store credit…”
   Mr. Fitzgerald
had already killed one cat this morning, and I, for one, didn’t want to be the
second. So I nudged the box of twine balls from the counter to accelerate my plot.
They bounced and rolled along the floor, coming to rest beneath the pot-bellied
stoves. The men stopped speaking and looked at me. Splendid.
   “Catters?”
Eddy said. “What on earth are you doing?”
   I
knocked a tin of thingamabobs to the floor. One needed a glossary just to shop here.
   “Catters!”
   When both
men approached, I leapt to the rope to draw notice. Naturally I brought it down
on top of myself. Rationation is not without peril. I poked through the heap of
loops and meowed for Eddy. He would recognize this as the same material from
which the killer had made this morning’s noose, and Mr. Fitzgerald would be exposed
as a torturer and a fiend. The neighbors might turn against him, but this
mattered less than the truth. Three cheers for me, the greatest cat in all
of—
   “Cattarina, stop this tomfoolery at once!”
Eddy said.
   Mr. Fitzgerald
stood behind Eddy and peered over his shoulder.“Well, I’ll be graveled. Think
she’s chasing a mouse?”
   “I
think she’s chasing her sanity,” Eddy said.
   I sank
my teeth into the jute and held fast to the clue. To quote the famous
philosopher, Cato,“We are twice armed when we bite in faith.” I had just
become a formidable opponent.
   Eddy tried
tugging the line from my jaws. Then he pulled me around the floor like a
child’s toy—a wooden cat on a string. When he paused to rethink this
strategy, I doubled my efforts, tangling and winding into the coil until I’d knotted
myself to the bitter end. With enough tortitude, any problem could be solved, I
reasoned. Soon, Eddy would appreciate the significance of the rope, and I could
let go of the blasted thing. I hoped it happened before dinner.
   “Well,
that is that, I’m afraid. Good day, Mr. Fitzgerald.” Eddy placed the hammer in
his pocket and dragged me toward the door, my teeth still grasping the clue. To
my horror, my fur cleaned a path on the dusty floor behind us. Still I did not
let go.
   “Wait!
Mr. Poe!” Mr. Fitzgerald said. “Don’t mean to start a chafe, but I can’t let
you to leave without paying for that item.”
   Eddy paused
near the entrance.“I have already purchased this hammer on credit. Perhaps we
can make a similar arrangement for the rope?”
   “We
have a limit, and you’ve reached it.”
   Eddy
scowled at me, his cheeks red.“Then would you like to buy a cat?”
   The
shopkeeper eyed me.“At the moment, no.”
   “A
barter, then.” He took a deep breath. “The hammer for the rope.”
   “That I
can do, Mr. Poe,” Mr. Fitzgerald said. “That I can do.”
   Eddy
left the hardware store, dragging me belly up in the dirt behind him. At least
we were no longer in the company of a murderer. Tabitha and Abner Arnold watched
us from the doorway of the shoemaker shop next door. Abner appeared to have recovered
from his trip to Jolley Spirits and stood a little straighter. Tabitha,
meanwhile, hadn’t changed a whit. She scowled at us, unamused by our conduct. Throughout
the courtyard, I wished for street. When we reached Franklin, I wished for soft
earth. Cobblestones are for paws, not backs. The entire trip home, Eddy did not
speak to me. And hecertainly did not
speak to the neighbors, try as they might to engage him.
   “You’ve
got an odd anchor, Poe!” Mr. Cook shouted from his front stoop. “It’s got teeth
and tail!”
   Mrs.
Cook stuck her head out of an upstairs window and pointed.“Look! He’s caught acatfish on his line. I know what Mrs.
Clemm is cooking for dinner!”
   Their
jeers held no meaning. I had a job to do, and nothing would stand between me
and my quarry, not even my pride. Just the same, I hoped I wouldn’t encounter
the tabbies, George and Margaret, or the Coon Cats, Samuel and Silas. Vanity
aside, I still prized my dignity.
   Eddy continued
in silence, stopping every few houses to see if I’d let go of the rope. But he
never once looked—reallylooked—at
the object between his fingers. With each passing stone that scraped my back, my
course grew more certain. Midnight was right. To help Snip and protect the cats
of Philadelphia from Mr. Fitzgerald, I had to steal Mr. Eakins’s book.











    [Картинка: img_10] 
   Buried
Secrets
   JUST AS I LICKED the last twig
from my tail, Muddy served dinner. Unfortunately, my harrowing drag was for
naught. Nothing came of these heroics, save for a bruise in a very delicate
place; my bottom had polished every cobblestone on Franklin. In the absence of
a hammer, Eddy pressed a candle stub onto the nail head, preventing Sissy or
Muddy from tearing their skirt again. But what skills he possessed in shirking handiwork,
he lacked in hunting. To snare Mr. Fitzgerald required the cunning of a cat,
nay, atortoiseshell cat.
   I
pondered the complexities of the crime during the evening meal. I’d detected no
lavender or citrus anywhere in Mr. Fitzgerald’s shop, and I remembered smelling
it on the noose this morning. Further, what possible reason could he have for
killing Snip? And had he been Snip’s owner? Lastly, I judged him a fair human.
I have been mistaken or misguided on occasion, even ill advised, but I have
never been wrong. Doubt over his role in the murder abounded. I prayed Mr.
Eakins’s book would provide answers.
   Once
I’d downed Muddy’s feeble offering of chicken broth, I proceeded to Green
Street, stopping first at the Beal residence for help. The grey tom and orange
molly napped on the stoop, warming themselves in the dwindling sun. I thanked
the Great Cat Above for the long stretch of summer daylight. It made my
investigation that much easier, and quite an investigation it had been. I’d
done more today than I had all spring. I climbed the terraced steps and chanced
upon a crockery bowl of water. I took a sip of the cool liquid, thinking the
Quaker cats would not mind.
   George
lifted his head, one eye still closed.“Cattarina?” He nudged Margaret. She
awoke with a start and sprang to her feet.
   “Y-you’re
alive,” she said to me. “But how? Every cat tongue on Green Street is a-wag. They’re
saying the Butcher got his hands on you.”
   “He
did,” I said. “It was quite an ordeal.” I licked the water from my lips.
   George
sniffed me.“And you’re not dead?”
   I
shifted to my hindquarters, minding the bruise.“You should be asking about the
Butcher.”
   “The
way you talk!” Margaret said.
   “Were
you terribly frightened?” George asked. “How did you escape his sausage
grinder? Skeletons. Were there cat skeletons in the home?” He backed into the
water bowl, spilling it. “Do tell us, Cattarina! Do tell us!”
   “You
misunderstand Mr. Eakins,” I said.
   “Who is
Mr. Eakins?” George shook the water from his paws and licked them.
   “The
Butcher. Please keep up.” I flicked the end of my tail. “From what Silas and
Sam— I mean, the Water Giants, tell me, he is a kindly old man who
rescues homeless cats. Though hemay
have a small flea problem.”
   Margaret’s
eyes grew wide. “You met the Water Giants?”
   “They
are not dead, either,” I added. “You may meet them yourself.”
   George
and Margaret sneezed, one after another—a clear rejection of my proposal.
   “I
assure you, I am serious. In fact, I would like you to accompany me to the
Butcher’s home.” I rose to all paws, keeping my tail low. “He is in possession
of a clue, and I need your help obtaining it.”
   “A
clue?” Margaret asked. “What is a clue?”
   I told
them the story of Snip, the book, and Mr. Fitzgerald. I’d even come up with a
plan on the way over, which I explained to them now. I softened the danger by
calling it a game of cat and mouse with unorthodox rules. This seemed to calm
George a bit, for he relaxed his ears toward the end of my speech.
   “We don’t
condone stealing,” he said once I’d finished. “Taking the book would be against
our code. Mr. Beal would be unhappy if we—”
   “Don’t
think of it as stealing,” I said. “Think of it helping a fallen…friend.”
   Margaret
blinked.“Very well. We will help you. But once you enter the Butcher’s home, you’re
on your own.”
   ***
   For all
the wailing, I would’ve thought George at death’s door. He lay on the walkway
leading to Mr. Eakins’s home, legs kicking in spasm. When I explained he would
be themouse, not the cat, in our
charade, he took some convincing. But I am nothing if not persuasive. I
crouched in the holly bushes next door and waited for the game to begin.
   “What
do you think of my performance?” George asked me.
   “Can
you cry louder?” I asked. “The Butcher is old and does not hear so well, I
imagine.”
   George
obliged, shrieking at full capacity. Another cat down the block screeched in
reply. Every performance needed an audience, I supposed. In a fashion, the
caterwaul lured Mr. Eakins outside, parrot cage in tow.“Heeeere kitty, kitty.
I’ll fix you up.”
   “Run,
George, run!” I shouted.
   George
needed no prompting. He leapt to his feet and disappeared from the garden like
a puff of smoke. Mr. Eakins gave chase, but the tom was in no danger of being
caught, not without aid of a net and perhaps a horse and driver. When George
reached the street, he signaled Margaret. She streaked across the old man’s
path, and the two tabbies ran ziggety-zag, luring Mr. Eakins down Green Street
and away from his home.
   I
slipped inside Mr. Eakins’s front hall and headed for the kitchen. Having been
a “guest” this morning, I navigated the rooms with ease, finding no Coon Cats. Thecat-pendium lay on the tabletop,
waiting for my perusal. I climbed topside and pushed the book open to search
for Snip’s entry. Spotted cats, striped cats, black cats— I paused on
Midnight’s page. Mr. Eakins had captured his likeness quite well. I continued
flipping until I reached Snip’s page. The black cat stared back at me with both
good eyes. I’d been right about him losing one after his rescue. Had Mr. Fitzgerald
taken it? I studied the marks beneath Snip’s sketch and wondered if they told
of his new owner and street address. I switched my tail. This I would leave to Eddy,
my man of letters.
   I tried
to lift the volume with my teeth. It dropped to the floor with a weighty thud. Fiddlesticks.
   A thump
and a crash rang out on the second floor. The Brothers Coon?
   I tried
nudging my prize from the kitchen to the parlor. I gave up when my nose hit the
raised threshold between rooms. Too many cobblestones lay between here and home
to continue in this manner. I knew this firstpaw or rather, firstbottom. I swiveled my ears and caught
the sound of footfall upon the stair—Silas and Samuel, without a doubt. I
opened the book again to Snip’s entry. If I could not take the whole clue, I
would take a piece of it. Minding the precious black marks, I gnawed the page
near the binding. Despite my swift action, Silas and Samuel entered and caught
me with a mouthful of paper. I had been reduced to a common woodchuck.
   “Don’t
look now, brother,” Silas said to Samuel, “but Cattarina is back, and she is
eating from the Book of Cats.”
   “How
very curious,” Samuel said. “Our Robert usuallyreads from the Book of Cats. Doesn’t Mrs. Poe feed her?”
   Silas
twitched his whiskers.“One look at her stomach, and you’ll know the answer.”
   I spat
a mouthful of paper.“I do not have time for this!”
   The
Coon Cats stared at me.
   “At
this very instant, Snip’s killer runs free,” I said. “And Mr. Eakins’s Book of
Cats may hold the scoundrel’s identity. I must, simplymust be allowed to take this page.”
   “Snip’s
killer?” Samuel cocked his head. “You mean he is dead?”
   Silas
grew quiet.
   “That
was the hanged cat I spoke of this morning,” I said. “You did not hear the
gossip?”
   “I told
you,” Samuel said. “We stay inside much of the day. Locked doors. Locked
windows. Mr. Eakins doesn’t let us wander like other cats. He talks aboutdanger anddisease and all sorts of bad things, most of which we don’t
understand. But we know he means to keep us safe.”
   “I
thought you spoke in jest.” I had heard of indoor plants, indoor rugs, and
indoor wicker. Butindoor cats? How
barbaric. The beautiful Coons were no more than furniture. I prayed this
new-fashioned practice would end with Mr. Eakins.
   “Dear brother,
our Robert was right!” Silas wailed. “Itis
dangerous out there!” Samuel tried to comfort him with a sideways rub. Silas
pushed him away. “I wish we had never found that hole in the roof. ‘Sneak outside
at night,’ you said. ‘He’ll never catch us,’ you said. We could’ve been killed,
just like Snip!” He left the room, dragging his tail behind him.
   “Forgive
my brother,” Samuel said. “He has a nervous condition.”
   “I
agree with Silas,” I said. “The world is a dangerous place. But Snip’s human
killed him, not illness or accident. Say, do you happen to know the new owner’s
name? This will save me much work as I am on his trail.”
   “I’m
afraid not. We meet some of the humans Robert works with, but not all.” He
glanced at the book. “Taking this page will help you find Snip’s owner?”
   “Yes.”
I considered explaining the black marks and what they might mean but decided against
it. In the end, the simplest answer won out. Samuel helped me tear Snip’s page
from the book and walked me to the door. Whether or not the paper contained Mr.
Fitzgerald’s information remained to be seen.
   “Good
luck with your hunt, Cattarina,” he said. “If there’s anything else we can do,
let us know. We are able to come and go by a hole in the roof. Silas will take
some coaxing, but we’ll be there if you need us.” He watched Mr. Eakins huff
and puff toward us down the street, his cage empty. “Snip was a good friend. I
hope you find his murderer.”
   I bade
him farewell and left with Snip’s information, escaping past Mr. Eakins by the
garden gate. The old man gasped at the torn page in my mouth, but George and
Margaret had winded him, and he could not give chase. He scratched his ribs and
yelled, “You are much too curious for your own good, Cattarina! Some secrets should
stay buried!” This sounded like a warning.
   Near
the corner of North Seventh, I detected the stench of rotting flesh. I followed
it all the way to Poe House and around to our kitchen garden where someone had committed
the unconscionable.











    [Картинка: img_11] 
   A
Sinister Scent
   EDDY KNELT NEAR THE morning
glory vines, a heap of fresh earth by his side. I left the torn page by the
back door and crept through the vegetable patch with more than a little trepidation.
I hoped the man hadn’t done what I suspected he had. I ducked under the
cucumber trellis, advancing unnoticed. Sweet horror! Snip’s exhumed body lay on
the ground near Eddy’s feet. Carrion insects speckled the tom’s fur, causing the
carcass to writhe with activity. My companion leaned closer to compare the rope
in his hand—Mr. Fitzgerald’s rope—to the one around Snip’s neck.
   “It is
a match,” he whispered to himself. “Aperfect
match.” His shirt reeked of spirits, different from the ones he’d drunk at
Jolley’s this afternoon, and his cravat dangled round his neck. “A neighbor is
responsible, I am certain. But what perverse imp moved this person to kill Heaven’s
finest?” He tugged his hair, lost in thought, then said: “To do wrong for
wrong’s sake only. To give in to the soul’s unfathomable longing to vex itself.”
   Judging
from his ink-smeared cheek, he’d abandoned a writing project for this grimundertaking, so to speak. My hunt had stoked
his imagination, yet a narrow path lay between satisfying my own desires and
satisfying his. The job of muse is a delicate one. I found that out during my
Glass Eye Killer caper. Introduce too much inspiration too soon, and I risked
losing my charge down a drunken, rambling trail from which he might never
return.
   I approached
him.
   “Catters?”
Eddy said. “Have you come for another bite?” He dangled the rope in front of
me, tossing it aside when I took no interest. “What else do you know, you
crafty thing? I suspect much.” He appraised me with what I took for admiration.
“I wish I could write as mysterious as a cat.”
   I considered
Snip’s entry and wondered if it would take Eddy too far from his story, to a
place beyond my reach. I did not have long to think. The back door opened, and Sissy
entered the garden with an easy, elegant air. She opened her lips to speak but stopped
when she realized what he’d done. Even her fever-bright cheeks could not
sustain color with this new discovery. Legs unsteady, she took a single step
toward her husband. “Edgar? What’s this?”
   “Sissy?”
Still kneeling, Eddy turned and spread his arms, trying to hide the cat carcass.
“I-I thought you were inside mending. Or knitting. Or mending your knitting.”
   I trotted
to her and rubbed the length of her skirt, delighting in thewhishhh of fabric.
   “AndI thought you were writing,” she said to
him. She leaned to touch my head. “We both changed our minds, it seems. Though
what yours concocted is disturbing, to say the least. Tell me, dear, have you
been drinking?”
   “I am
as straight as judges.” He leaned a little to the left.
   “I
see.” She put her hands on her hips. “Why have you dug up the cat?”
   “To
check on him, of course.” Eddy offered a queasy smile. “Still dead.”
   Sissy took
another step, alighting on Snip’s page by accident. She bent and retrieved it,
giving the entry a quick glance. The meaning of the words played across her
face, lifting the corner of her mouth. I had not stolen the clue in vain. When
she finished reading, she looked at me the way Eddy had, with approval.
   “What
have you got?” Eddy asked her.
   “Nothing.
An old market list. Mother must have lost it.” She folded the page and stuck it
down her dress front. I thought it an odd place for a carryall, but humans never
ceased to surprise me. “Why don’t I leave you to…whatever you were doing. I have
an errand to run.”
   “An
errand? At this hour? It must be six o’clock.” Eddy rose and dusted the dirt
from his pants.
   “It’s seven.”
Sissy snapped her fingers, and I trailed her out of the front garden. “I still
have daylight and will only be a block away. Do not worry.” She latched the
gate behind us. “Mother is polishing the furniture, so you needn’t disturb her
with my comings and goings. And for heaven’s sake, Edgar Poe, wash your hands!”
   ***
   To my
surprise, Sissy and I headed down Green Street instead of toward Mr.
Fitzgerald’s shop. She’d left without her bonnet and squinted into the setting
sun. “Cattarina, between this crime and the ones last fall, you’re turning into
a four-footed constable,” she said to me. “I know you pilfered that page from
Mr. Eakins’s book. I can tell by the teeth marks.” She removed the slip of
paper from her bosom and showed me its frayed edge. “It was beyond clever of
you to bring it home. I’m impressed.” She replaced the item and gave me a worried
smile. “I want to know who took the poor tom’s life, too. It’s peculiar, but
I’ve taken an interest in him.”
   Unlike
the brightly clad ladies of Fairmount, Quaker women dressed in dull browns,
free of adornment—no ribbons, no velvet flowers, no dizzying patterns. The
gentlemen sported equally somber attire. Sissy spoke to a few them, including
Mr. Beal, George and Margaret’s companion, and a lady she called Mrs. West,
which struck me as odd since the woman traveled east. But what these Quakers
lackedin fashion sense, they more than made up for in culinary acumen. Delicious
smells drifted from the dwellings on either side: roasted chicken, broiled
pork, stewed beef. I battled my stomach, fending off hunger pangs. Muddy’s broth
had done little to appease me.
   We
crossed over Franklin and arrived at the cottage with the rooster weathervane,
the one I’d encountered this morning. An entire lifetime had passed since the
murder, or so it seemed. “We should knock, shouldn’t we?” Sissy said to me. She
touched the brass knocker, wiped her fingers on her bodice, and tried again.
   Tabitha
Arnold answered the door. Perhaps she had not been taught to smile as a child.“Mrs.
Poe?” she said. “Store’s closed, but I can fit you for shoes if you like. Come through
to the workshop.” From our interactions on the street, she’d proved unlikeable.
But I didn’t take her for a killer. And a man’s scent graced the murder weapon,
not a woman’s.Mr. Arnold, however,
had just become my chief suspect.
   Sissy retreated
to the walkway, widening the gap between them.“No, no. I’ve come to…” She touched
her throat. “I’ve come to ask you about the black cat this morning.”
   I
trilled in agreement. Yes,black cat.
We needed answers, and we needed them now.
   Mrs. Arnold
flew at Sissy and grabbed her by the arms.“It was so awful! Poor Pluto! Why
did he have to hang him like he did?” She looked skyward and appealed to forces
unknown. “Why? Why did this have to happen?”
   I noted
her shoes. They held too many scuffmarks to count, and tarnish flecked the
buckles. An old proverb came to mind, something about the mouser’s kittens
going hungry. Humans must’ve had a similar saying about shoemakers, and if so,
it applied to Mrs. Arnold. I realized something else, too. While Green Street housed
a preponderance of Quakers, the Arnolds did not seem to be of their ilk. I
sniffed the hem of the woman’s dress—nothing of concern.
   Sissy
extracted herself from the woman’s grasp. “So it’s true. Youare the hanged cat’s owner.”
   “Yes. We’d
adopted him from Mr. Eakins a week ago, maybe a little longer. I scarcely think
anyone knew we had him except the dentist fellow. Why should I admit this and
have people think ill of me? I have a business to run, you know.” Mrs. Arnold
dabbed her nose with a tattered handkerchief she pulled from her sleeve. “How
didyou find out? Did Mr. Eakins tell
you?”
   Sissy
glanced at me.“No, there’s a constable involved.”
   “Harkness?”
   “No.” Sissy
smiled demurely. “Constable Claw.”
   My ears
pricked at the skittering of tiny feet. I sniffed the air. A mouse lived in the
Arnold residence. They should’ve taken more care with their cat.
   “You
said ‘he’ a moment ago,” Sissy said. “‘Why didhe have to hang him like he did?’ To whom were you referring?”
   “Mr. Fitzgerald,
of course. The only thing he hates more than Englishmen are cats.” She tucked
her handkerchief away, leaving a lace corner poking from her sleeve. “It all
started with the tree in the courtyard. I’ve wanted to chop it down for ages.
No one can see my shop with all that greenery, and it’s hurting my business.
But he didn’t want to, the fool. Now he’s gone and hung Pluto from one of the
limbs to...to…” Her bottom lip trembled. “Warn me away!” She sobbed into
Sissy’s shoulder.
   Sissy
patted her back.“There, there. We gave Pluto a Christian burial.” She leaned around
the woman and glanced through the open door. “Where is Abner? Is he gone?”
   “Having
a Jolley good time, I’m sure.” She straightened and wiped her face.
   Sissy
sighed.“If I’ve caught your meaning, Mrs. Arnold, we have a similar problem.”
   “I’m
going to a meeting tomorrow—the Sons of Temperance. Why don’t you join
me?”
   The
women blathered on aboutteetotaling,
a subject unfamiliar, leaving me to my work. I padded up the walkway and into
the house, thinking to flush out my quarry. One sniff of Mr. Arnold or his possessions,
and I would have the truth. I paused in the front hall to catch what scents I
could.
   Tiny
footsteps to my left.
   I crouched
and peered beneath the entryway bench. A pair of mice scurried near the baseboard.
Dash it all, I could not resist. I raked under the wooden seat, missing them by
a whisker. The mice slipped into the adjoining parlor with asquee, squee, squee! I gave chase, bounding
over an armchair and darting across the room to meet them at the kitchen
threshold. But the vermin had the advantage of familiarity. They headed for a
hole they’d gnawed in the wall and escaped to the other side. I sprinted into
the kitchen after them, ziggety-zagging around a pie cupboard, a wash pail and
mop, a dining chair. During my pursuit, I focused on the sights, sounds, and
smells of my prey, ignoring all else. I could not have guessed the trouble this
single-minded attention would soon cause.
   The
mice slipped through the cracked cellar door and disappeared into the dark. I charged
through the portal and dashed down the cellar steps—a mistake of gigantic
proportion, but one easily predicted by Sir Isaac Kitten. The door banged back on
its hinges and slammed shut, causing an equal and opposite reaction to my
action. A student of physics, I should have known better. I tried yowling for
Sissy, but her human hearing proved too meager.
   I was
trapped.
   Seeking
an open window or warped door, I traveled deep into the earthen chamber. My
history with cellars is a storied one, full of grisly exploits. This made it
all the more difficult to proceed. Yet I had no choice. When I reached the
bottom step, I paused and smelled for new, fresh air, thinking to follow it to
freedom. My stomach tightened at the sinister trace of lavender and citrus.











    [Картинка: img_12] 
   Judgment
Day
   THE COLOGNE DISSIPATED SOON
after its discovery. This meant I had stumbled upon the killer’s smell and not
the killer himself. This did little to assuage my fear, for the realization had
occurred in his blasted cellar. I lost track of time without the sun, so I marked
its passage with hunger pangs, abandoning this strategy when they struck with
maddening frequency. Somewhere between starvation and death—why, oh, why hadn’t
Muddy served something heartier for dinner?—footsteps marched overhead.
   From
the top stair, I peeked through a wide gap under the door that revealed the lowest
portion of the kitchen. Light filled the room, indicating Mrs. Arnold had fired
a lamp. I thought about meowing for help until a second pair of feet entered
the room. The culprit, I presumed. Until he left for either the bed or the tavern,
I was stuck.
   “I saw
Mrs. Poe in the street,” Mr. Arnold said. I recognized his voice at once. “It
wouldn’t surprise me if she passed away this Christmas.” He hiccupped and
laughed. “She looks positively used up.”
   “Abner!”
Mrs. Arnold said. “She may be married to a strange little man, but so am I. Now
I’ve taken a liking to Virginia Poe, and I’ll not have you speak about her like
that.”
   He
dashed a cup to the floor and strode toward her.“I’ll not have you speak aboutme like that! Do you hear?”
   “Please,
Abner, I can’t take that again.Please.”
   Silence.
With only their shoes visible, the scene terrified me less than had I been with
them. Even still, I feared for the woman.
   “Don’t
know what comes over me,” he muttered.
   “Why
don’t I make you some tea?” Mrs. Arnold said. Her voice flowed like tap water.
“It’s just what you need after a trip to the tavern. Sit, dear. Sit. Are you
hungry? Or did you eat at Mr. Jolley’s?”
   Mr.
Arnold heeded her advice and settled into the dining chair.“I ate already. A
bowl of pepperpot.” He hadn’t bothered switching his shabby boots for slippers,
and I found their condition distasteful, considering his occupation. He
shuffled them, knocking dried mud to the floor. “How was business today?” he
asked. “Slow?”
   “Is it
any wonder?”
   “What’s
that supposed to mean?” he snapped.
   “The
cat, Abner. The damned cat hanging from the damned tree.”
   “Forget
Pluto. One less mouth to feed.” Mr. Arnold’s boots shifted sideways, as if he
leaned a bit in his chair. I flinched when a small pocketknife clattered to the
floorboards. Fingers reached to retrieve it, and the blade disappeared from
view. In the presence of this weapon, I should havefocused solely on the
predicament at hand. Yet Eddy’s story occupied my thoughts. My companion had
come close to understanding the killer and writing with true vision.
   “I paid the landlord and the county tax
collector this month. It took the last of our savings,” Mrs. Arnold said. “Won’t
be long until we’re in the poor house, with or without our cat.” A cook stove
burner grated against its metal fitting. The pop and crackle of a stoked fire
filled thekitchen. A thin line of smoke drifted beneath the door, irritating
my nose. I didn’t dare sneeze, not if I wanted to avoid the hangman’s loop. While
I was at it, I fancied keeping both eyes.
   “Our
luck will turn around, Tabby,” he said. “It’s got to.”
   “Yes,
Abner, I’m sure it will.” A kettle lid rattled. The spicy sweet smell of loose
tea permeated the room. “Why don’t you wait for me in the family room? I’ll
bring your cup on a tray.”
   Mr. Arnold
staggered to his feet.“Tabby, I’m…I’m a different person sometimes. Especially
when I’m not feeling well.”
   “Go
rest, dear. All is forgiven.”
   He plodded
from the room with uncertain steps, a gait I knew all too well. Soon the
teakettle whistled, masking the sound of Mrs. Arnold’s weeping. It reminded me
of Sissy’s, any given evening at Poe House.
   ***
   That night,
my appetite grew so severe that it deserted me, leaving a cramp in its place. During
Mr. and Mrs. Arnold’s tea party, I crept downstairs to relieve myself. The
lamplight beneath the door illuminated the cellar, giving me a sense of the
space. Crates of onions and potatoes, a washboard, an old rocking
horse—nothing edible. Someone had placed a basket of dirty linens near
the bottom of the stairs, so I hopped in, left my offering, and pawed a dressing
gown over the evidence. To no one’s surprise, least of all my own, the cologne
on the clothing matched the scent on Snip’s noose. I had caught my man. Or rather,
he’d caught me.
   I
returned to my post with a heavy heart. Eddy, Sissy, and Muddy wouldn’t miss me
until morning. Even if they searched for me tonight, they wouldn’t know where
to begin. Sissy might think to return here, but Mr. and Mrs. Arnold would tell
her they hadn’t seen me. And in truth, they hadn’t.
   Before
retiring that evening, the woman of the house entered the kitchen and turned off
the lamp, cloaking the kitchen and cellar in black. I would not spend the night
in this place. Using the dark to my advantage, I jumped and rattled the
doorknob.
   “Hello?”
she said. “Who’s there?”
   I
jumped and rattled it again.
   Her
steps grew louder.
   I balanced
on the edge of the step and waited for the woman to open the door. She leaned into
the portal and queried the dark.“Who’s there?” she asked. With the speed of a grass
snake, I slithered into the still-dark kitchen, brushing her leg by accident. She
shrieked and sprang back from the cellar. “Pluto? Is that you?” she said. “It
c-can’t be you. You’re dead. Unless you’ve come back to haunt me. Please tell
me you haven’t.” I hid behind the wash pail, staying quiet. She finally cackled.
“You’re losing your mind, Tabby, old girl. It was your dressing gown against
your skin.”
   The
stairs creaked following Mrs. Arnold’s departure as she climbed to what I
guessed was her bedchamber. After an interval, when the couple surely slumbered,
I searched the bottom floor for an escape route. It was no use. The cobblers
had laced their house tighter than a lady’s boot.
   Loud
snoring lured me to the second floor and to their sleeping quarter—a solitary
room at the top of the stair. A low, slanted ceiling and plastered timber walls
confined the area, giving it the feel of an attic. Because of its cramped size,
the chamber held only a small cabinet, which Mrs. Arnold used as a side table, and
a spindle post bed. The couple lay fast asleep, a patchwork quilt pulled to
their chins. I paused at the threshold and studied the lit candle on the cabinet.
Mrs. Arnold must have forgotten to snuff it out before falling asleep. The flame
danced atop the white pillar, mesmerizing me. It dipped and swayed, drawn by a
draft. A draft!
   Above
Mr. Arnold lay a partially open window, hidden behind a pair of tapestry
curtains. With so little floor space, the couple had pushed the bedframe
against the wall directly beneath it. The man could’ve used the draperies for a
blanket had he so chosen. To escape, I needed to bypass the pair without waking
them. I planned my trajectory, adjusting for dim lighting, unsure footing, and other
variables. My course contained enough degrees and angles to make René Descattes
proud: a hop to the side table, a leap to the headboard, a sliiiide to the
tapestry curtains, and an elegant landing on the sill. There I would use my
substantial frame to open the sash. Except my scheme did not include revenge.
   I turned
in a circle, hoping to change my mind. It did not work. I could not leave
without giving Mr. Arnold a well-deserved lashing for Snip’s murder. So I
analyzed anew, took a deep breath, and jumped to the side table…
   …knocking
over the candle.
   I’d
failed to account for the greatest variable: my lumbering physique. I watched
helplessly as the flame ignited a bundle of mail. The blaze grew bigger,
leaping onto Mrs. Arnold’s nightcap with enviable grace and setting her head aflame.
   “Aaaaiiiyyyeee!”
the woman screeched.
   She
swatted her nightcap and knocked it to the bed, catching the quilt on fire. The
stench of singed hair filled the room.“Wake up! Wake up and help me, or we’ll
lose the house and the store!” she shouted to Mr. Arnold. She shoved her
husband, but he continued to snore. “Drunk old fool,” she said. “If you won’t
fetch help, I will.” Then she leapt from the bed and fled the room, shutting
the door behindher. She did not notice me.
   Frantic
to escape, I bounced off the headboard and landed on the sill, avoiding the
flames. I’d no sooner alighted than thedrunkold fool woke. Mr. Arnold sat forward
and wiped the sweat from his brow, unaware of the campfire in his lap.“Tabby?
Is it hot in here? Let’s open the window.” He reached for the sash and froze.
“A cat! A cursed cat!” The blaze lit his face, giving it cruel angles. “What’s
this? Have you sentenced me to hell, you minion of the devil?”
   The
fire ravaged the left curtain panel and climbed to the ceiling, consuming the
timber with appetite. Since I had no desire to join Snip, I tried to squeeze
through the window before roasting in this self-made oven. Mr. Arnold, however,
had other plans. He threw back the quilt and smothered the bed flames before
dragging me back to wring my neck. How I scratched and spit, fought and bit!
Pickled by spirits, the old man shrugged off the prick of my teeth and the
terrible heat suffocating us both. When smoke clouded my vision, I lashed out
wildly, catching Mr. Arnold’s nightshirt or what I mistook for Mr. Arnold’s
nightshirt. I’d hooked the unlit portion of curtain instead. I tried flexing my
claws to remove them, but they’d become tangled in the tieback cord. That was
when the rogue picked me up and threw me against the plaster wall, curtain cord
and all.
   “I will
not stand for this judgment!” he screamed. “I will not! Do you hear me?”
   I dove
for the window, squeezing under the sash and falling—feet first, I should
add—to the alley below. Aside from sizzled whiskers and a blackened tail,
I had escaped relatively unharmed. Mr. Arnold was not so lucky. He fell from
the window, nightshirt ablaze, and landed beside me with a skull-ringing thump.










    [Картинка: img_13] 
   A
Wicked Impression
   “GOOD MORNING, CATTARINA,” SISSY
said. I flicked my ear in response. I’d crawled into bed with her last night
after licking the soot from my fur. Too tired to knead the covers, I fell fast
asleep until dawn. Luckily, my tail suffered no permanent damage. My back paws
were not so fortunate. I discovered the seared pads on my walk home from the Arnold
bonfire. “I asked Muddy to leave the kitchen window open for you last night,”
she said. “I knew you’d come home late. Catting around with a handsome fellow,
are we?” She lifted my chin and studied my face. “Why, Cattarina Poe, where are
your whiskers?” She turned me over and examined me. “And your back paws are
burnt, poor thing. What happened to you last night?”
   Sissy
left the bed.“Mother will make a salve. She is an excellent nursemaid, even if
she dotes on her patients a trifle much.” She crossed to the wardrobe. Since destroying
hertown dress yesterday, only hereverydaydress remained, along with an
extra pair of stockings and white chemise. I think she looked fine without clothing.
I also thought the Delaware should flow with milk and shad should grow on
trees.
   Pots
clattered in the kitchen below. Muddy had risen before dawn, as she always did,
to build a fire and make breakfast. I yawned and stretched, reveling in the
warmth of the cotton-stuffed mattress. I was the only cat I knew with two jobs:
muse by day, chest heater by night. Since his wife’s illness, Eddy had given up
marital cohabitation so Muddy could nurse her daughter through nighttime
spells. The old woman stayed in the adjoining bedroom and entered at the first
cough. I did what I could to keep Sissy warm while she slept, but it was not
enough; it would never be enough, and I carried this truth in my heart. Death
is a natural process until it happens in one’s family, then it’s a tragedy.
   Once Sissy
twisted her hair into a coil, she carried me from the topmost floor, past Eddy’s
chambers on the middle floor, to the bottom floor. We found Eddy at the kitchen
table with tea and newspaper, sitting among the vestiges of breakfast. Muddy fussed
with a kettle of water. Now that the black cat’s death had vanished into the
past, life at Poe House had returned to normal. Sheset me in front of a bowl
filled with scrambled eggs, and I gobbled the food without a good morning rub
to Eddy’s leg. I possessed a hunger so severe that I finished before the dear
girl took her chair. She sat next to Eddy and poured a cup of tea from the pot
on the table. “Cattarina has lost her whiskers,” she said.
   I disappeared
beneath the kitchen table for my post-breakfast routine. Seated upon the straw rug,
I started my usual preen. But I abandoned this activity when my whisker stubs
pricked my paw. How I missed them. I brushed against Eddy’s pants and Sissy’s skirt
instead, marking them with fur for the day.
   Sissy
continued,“What’s more, she’s burnt her paws.”
   “How very
curious.” Eddy peeked under the table at me, eyes narrowed. “The Arnolds’ house
burned down last night.”
   “How do
you know? Is it in the paper? What happened?” The words left Sissy’s mouth in a
tumble. “Do tell!”
   I
emerged from my hiding place to see Eddy tip a non-existent hat.“I sit before
you, Mrs. Poe, a proud member of the bucket brigade. The engine company needed
help, and the menfolk obliged. We saved the neighborhood.” He looked at Muddy.
“What time was it? Around midnight?”
   I
stared at him. What did he know about my pal from Rittenhouse?
   “Half-past,”
Muddy said. “You didn’t come home until two.”
   “Tabitha
Arnold escaped unharmed,” he said. “Abner Arnold was not so fortunate.”
   Abner Arnold? I
crept under the table again, dreading a talking-to from Eddy.Yes, I burnt down the neighbor’s house. No,
I am not sorry. Now then, what is for lunch? But he didn’t bother. I
wondered if I’d paid the neighbors a favor by ousting the cobblers from Green
Street. I’d certainly paid the cats a favor. I took the center of the room
again and commenced with a stretching regimen.
   Eddy
tipped his cup and took the last sip.“They sent him to Almshouse last night, but
I do not know how he fared.”
   “What
heroics! Why didn’t you wake me?” She dropped a sugar lump in her tea and
stirred it. “I would have helped.”
   “That’sexactly why we didn’t wake you.” Muddy
wiped her hands on her apron and joined them, pulling up a chair. “It would
have been too taxing for you.”
   “And to
think I spoke to Mrs. Arnold yesterday,” Sissy said. “Hours before it
happened.”
   “Where, Virginia?” her mother asked. “At
the market?”
   “No,” Eddy
said. “It was later in the day, wasn’t it, my love? Your mysterious seven
o’clock errand?”
   “Yes,
I-I needed to speak to her about a pair of shoes.” She took the last piece of
fried bread from the plate and slathered it with jam. “They were supposed to be
a surprise for you, Eddy, but now you’ve gone and spoiled it.”
   “Is
that so?” He scooped me up to examine my paws. Dark circles rimmed his eyes, indicating
a night of interrupted sleep. “Catters must have been near the fire last night.
But why?”
   “Constable
Claw,” Sissy said under her breath.
   Muddy
cupped her hand around her ear.“What’s that?”
   “Nothing,
Mother, nothing.” She turned to her husband. “Cattarina followed me to
Tabitha’s house and stayed behind. That’s the simplest explanation.” She smiled
at him, but mirth did not crinkle the corners of her eyes. “Did you know Tabitha
Arnold attends the Sons of Temperance meetings?”
   Eddy
ignored her query and rose to set me on the sideboard, his brow knitted.
   “I didn’t know she attended,” Muddy said.
She patted her daughter’s arm with a hand roughed by housework. “The Sons meet
at Saint George’s Methodist, don’t they?”
   I
settled onto a lace doily while they prattled aboutteetotaling again. One day, I should like to know its meaning. As
the women talked, Eddy kept his back to them, focusing on me. He scratched the
top of my head, paying close attention to my ears. I rewarded him with a purr.
In this relaxed state, my thoughts wandered to yesterday. I had solved a crime,
and the wrongdoer had received punishment, though to what extent I did not
know. Death would have been fitting, considering Mr. Arnold’s transgression,
but I would settle for disfigurement. Another triumph for Philadelphia’s
favorite rationator.
   “I learned
another interesting tidbit from Tabitha,” Sissy said.
   “What’s
that?” Muddy asked. “That their shoes fall apart when you wear them?” She
lifted her foot and showed off the split sole of her shoe.
   “I
learned they owned the black cat. And his name was Pluto.”
   Eddy faced
them.“Thatis disturbing, but not
altogether surprising. Did the old woman admit to killing the creature?”
   “No,
she blamed Mr. Fitzgerald. Something about a rivalry over a tree.” Sissy
spooned eggs onto her plate from the serving platter. “Mother, will you make a
salve for Cattarina? Her paws are in need of ointment.”
   Muddy
nodded.“I think I have the ingredients.”
   “Well, I,
too, discovered a tidbit,” Eddy said. He crossed his arms and leaned against
the sideboard. “Whoever killed Pluto bought the rope from Mr. Fitzgerald’s
hardware shop.”
   “Or Mr.
Fitzgerald took it from his own store,” Sissy offered.
   “I know
Fitz all to pieces,” Eddy said. “He is not a cat killer. Mr. Arnold is the more
likely culprit.”
   “What
is this fascination with dead animals?” Muddy said. “It’s unnatural and
unhealthy. Why can’t we discuss pleasanter things? I hear Mr. Crumley’s getting
tossed in debtor’s prison for skipping rent. And Mrs. Porter’s husband left her
for—” The whistle of the teakettle cut her off. “Oh, fiddle.” Heeding its
call, she gathered every dish but Sissy’s and deposited the lot into the basin.
Then she doused them with water from the kettle and commenced to washing,
leaving husband and wife to converse in private.
   “Speaking
of the black cat, how is your eulogy coming?” Sissy asked Eddy.
   “It is not.”
He kissed his wife’s head. “What are your plans today, sweet Virginia?”
   “Oh,” she
said, “I will be mending. Or knitting. Or mending my knitting. Do not worry,
husband.” She took a bite of egg.
   “Well,
try and rest.” He laid his hand on her shoulder. “I do not like your color this
morning.”
   I
watched below the table. Sissy clutched a handful of skirt fabric in response
to Eddy’s comment. As the household’s most astute observer, I learned my
humans’ secrets without them even knowing they’d shared. No matter. I kept them
all. She released the fabric and asked him, “What areyour plans?”
   “Cattarina
and I have business at Mr. Jolley’s.” He put his finger to his lips before she
could object. “I will touch neither drop nor dram. I promise. When I return, I
will know about the fire and Mr. Arnold’s current state. If I am lucky, I will
also hear about the black cat, for his story vexes me greatly.” He whisked me into
his arms and laid me over his shoulder. “Muddy! Catters and I will await your
salve in the parlor.”
   ***
   The tallow,
lard, and beeswax Muddy applied to my paws smelled good enough to eat, but I
resisted the salve, for it soothed my burns. It would also provide sustenance
later, should the need arise. Blasted appetite. Eddy carried me to keep my
tender paws off the ground, and we arrived at Jolley Spirits. As we entered the
tavern, the shrunken old apple gave us atsk-tsk.
I noted a bandage on his arm, the arm I shredded yesterday.“Good morning, Mr.
Poe. It’s a little early for drink, but I’m happy to oblige a customer and his money—
I mean cat.” Mr. Jolley touched his wound and sneered at me. “As long as it
stays far, far away from me. If it doesn’t, it will meet with my boot.”
   “She
will behave,” Eddy said. “You have my word.”
   “What
can I bring you?”
   “No
refreshment this morning, good sir. Just water.”
   “Water?”
Mr. Jolley grumbled. “You’ll be back later for something stronger, I trust?”
   “Of
course.”
   This
seemed to satisfy Mr. Jolley. He started to leave then thought better of it.“What’s
that smell? It’s awful.” He curled his upper lip.
   Eddy
glanced at my paws and cleared his throat, his cheeks red.“I suspect it’s coming
from your kitchen. Now if you’ll excuse me.” He ignored Mr. Jolley’s scowl and walked
to the bar, setting me on the oaken surface. I waited for the ancient barkeep
to hobble back with Eddy’s order. When he did, Mr. Jolley delivered a glass of
water, not liquor, and I let him go with a warning glare.
   “We
must keep our wits about us, Catters,” Eddy said to me. “We’ve important work ahead.”
   For
most of the morning, we eavesdropped on the other patrons. Many instances I caughtfire andAbner Arnold and evencat.
These I had anticipated; humans love their gossip. But Eddy seemed to expect them,
too, for he did not show interest until he heardsupernatural. Upon the expression, my companion struck up
conversation with the fellow who’d spoken it—a portly gentleman with ruddy
cheeks and a diamond stickpin in his lapel. They shook hands and introduced
themselves.
   “Orson
Pettigrew, dentist,” the man said to Eddy.
   “Edgar
Allan Poe, petrified of the dentist.”
   Mr.
Pettigrew laughed.“Ah, Mr. Poe! I read ‘The Tell-Tale Heart’ in thePioneer last winter. Unnerving story.
How did you think of it?”
   “Yes,
howdid I?” Eddy laid a hand on my
back. “It’s a mystery.”
   Mr.
Jolley dispensed two glasses of whiskey to Mr. Pettigrew and withdrew to break
up a heated discussion between two coalminers—something aboutwestward expansion andOregon Trail. Mr. Pettigrew downed the
first drink.“One for me,” he said. The other he poured into a flask pulled
from his vest pocket. “And one for my patient. I’ve got an extraction in an
hour.”
   Eddy loosened
his cravat with a crooked finger.“Mr. Pettigrew, I heard you tell another
gentleman that supernatural elements caused the Arnold house fire. Why would
you say that?”
   Mr.
Pettigrew elbowed Eddy.“Working on another story, eh?”
   “A
eulogy.”
   “But the
old codger survived, Mr. Poe.” Mr. Pettigrew took a swig from the flask. “Lost
his hair and burnt himself, but he’s alive, by God.”
   “It’s
not for Abner Arnold. It’s for another man,” Eddy said. “Pluto…Katzenheimer. Black
hair, green eyes, trim physique? I’m sure you’ve met him.”
   Mr.
Pettigrew scratched his head.
   “Forgive
me, but I am in a hurry. The supernatural?”
   Mr.
Pettigrew leaned into Eddy and lowered his voice.“It’s payback, Mr. Poe, for
the cat.” He grinned, exposing several teeth trimmed with gold. “I heard about
the hanging from a patient—horrible woman with bleeding gums. Elmira…?
Well, it doesn’t matter. I wanted a peek as much as the next man. So I closed office
yesterday afternoon and ran into Reverend Gerry on the way over. We got to
talking.” He took another drink from the flask. “When he described the hanged cat,
I knew it belonged to Tabitha and Abner Arnold. I’d seen the creature at their
shop when I picked up my new boots.” He lifted his shoe, showing Eddy the
peeling sole. “They’re less than two weeks old. I’ll never buy another pair
from those crooks.”
   The rumple
and snap of a newspaper enticed me to the end of the bar. Leaving a trail of
greasy footprints, I walked past a row of patrons, brushing their noses with my
tail. The paper’s owner departed as I arrived, giving me full access to the
plaything. I sat on the folded pages and delighted in the crinkle under my
bottom. Between my paws, I noticed a sketch of a man with a passing resemblance
to Mr. Arnold. Bald patches covered his head and fresh wounds marred his
cheeks. If it was really the shoemaker, he’d paid for his crime.
   “The
cat, Mr. Pettigrew?” Eddy asked.
   Drawn
by my companion’s voice, I rejoined the men and sat near Eddy’s elbow.
   “The
cat!” Mr. Pettigrew said, eying me. “Yes, the cat. Sad creature. I suspected
Abner Arnold put an end to its life, but when I visited the remnants of their
home this morning, Iknew he’d done
it. That mystical mischief is the talk of Green Street.”
   “I suspect
him as well. But why do you think supernatural forces are at work?”
   He
finished the flask and slapped the bar to call Mr. Jolley, professing his need
for another round.“I suggest you visit what’s left of his home, Mr. Poe. Then
you will see for yourself.”
   ***
   Eddy marched
up Franklin to Green Street with me tucked under his arm. Panting and wheezing
from the exertion, he arrived at the Arnold’s razed home and set me on the
sidewalk. Easily half the neighborhood had gathered to view last night’s
accident, including Mr. Cook and Mr. Eakins. The men and women clustered around
the debris, forming a wall of parasols, flat-brimmed Quaker hats, and the odd
top hat. “Pardon me,” Eddy said, pushing between them. “I must get to the
front. I am here on important business.”
   I
slipped through the human fence and meowed for Eddy to join me near the alley. The
fire had blackened the bricks of the brownstone next door, but the building had
experienced no real hardship. The blaze hadn’t jumped the alley or the street
either, which meant I’d caused no harm to the innocent, unless you counted Mrs.
Arnold. The guilty, however, had paid dearly. The cobbler shop, adjacent to the
rear of the property, had suffered damage to its back wall but remained largely
intact. Little remained of the home, save for a charred timber skeleton and a
few determined walls.
   “I do
not see Mr. Pettigrew’s supernatural evidence, do you, Catters?”
   I
meowed and sniffed the still-wet pile of wood.
   “By the
by, I feel sorry for Mrs. Arnold,” he said to me. “Though I am not sure about
Mr. Arnold. If hedid hang the black
cat, this may be divine retribution.” He smoothed the back of his hair. “Or
maybe he went on a spree before coming home and fell asleep with candles
aflame. Mr. Arnold was quite the tippler, Catters.”
   “Tippler,
indeed,” said the woman at Eddy’s elbow. A lady of some wealth—not a
Quaker—she wore a silken blue gown with a lace-paneled neckline. She
closed her parasol with a snap. “In all my days, I’ve never seen a man more
taken with drink than Abner Arnold. I don’t know how his poor wife copes. She’s
up half the night, crying and pacing, waiting for him to come home from the
tavern.” She pointed to the charred home next door with her umbrella. “I live
right there, and I see everything.Everything.”
   “Madam,
was Mr. Arnold a cruel man?” Eddy asked her. “Capable of, say, cutting out a
cat’s eye?”
   She
touched her breastbone and frowned.“He’s never been a kind man, always quick
with his fists. Many a night I’ve heard them quarrel, and many a morning I’ve
seen bruises on Mrs. Arnold’s face. But these last few months, he’s gotten
worse. Much worse.” She shook her head. “It’s the drink, I tell you. It rots a
man’sbrain. And don’t tell me otherwise, because I read it in Godey’s. Thank
goodness the temperance movement is taking hold in Philadelphia.”
   Eddy
pressed her.“The accident…do you think it was supernatural?”
   “That’s
what Mr. Pettigrew says. He’s been in and out of the shops this morning,
spouting nonsense about ghost cats and revenge from the grave. He’s a regular
Dickens.” She huffed. “It’s got nothing to do with ghosts and everything to do
with spirits.”
   Eddy
nodded thoughtfully. The woman tried talking to him a while longer, but he’d
already withdrawn into his thoughts. I brushed his leg to bring him round. “I
do not like keeping company with Abner Arnold, Cattarina. I am convinced he
killed Pluto in a drunken rage, and it frightens me that I—”
   “Look!”
Mr. Cook shouted. “It’s the ghost cat!” One large, flabby arm shot forward, and
he pointed to a plaster wall near the center of the wreckage. It had fallen
straight down from the second story and remained upright, bolstered by scorched
furniture and twisted stovepipe.
   The
woman in blue shaded her eyes.“Wait! I see it! Mr. Pettigrew was right.” She
caught her breath. “And it’s got a rope around its neck!”
   Try as
I might, too many legs prevented me from seeing the ghost cat.
   “Oh,
me! A sign from the Other Side,” Mr. Eakins said above the crowd. “I knew Abner
Arnold killed the poor creature, and this proves it!”
   A
series of exclamations rose from the men and women:“Strange!” and “Singular!” The
neighbors of Green Street pressed closer to look at the curiosity.
   Eddy whisked
me from harm’s way and sat me on his shoulder. A lady with a coalscuttle bonnet
darted in front of us, causing my companion to stand on tiptoe for a look. “Oh,
Jupiter!” Eddy said. He covered his mouth with his hand. “Can it be, Catters?”
   On the
lone piece of wall, I glimpsed the apparition in question—the outline of
a hanged cat. Egad!I had been the
one to make the impression. The heat from the fire must have reacted with
materials in the plaster, softening it enough to accept my mark when Mr. Arnold
dashed me against it. Soot from my fur added depth and shadow to the gruesome likeness.
The curtain cord that tangled my neck last night had been preserved, too, and
looked very much like a noose. I hadn’t just caught and punished the murderer; I’d
announced his wrongdoing to all of Philadelphia.











    [Картинка: img_14] 
   The
Hundred-Dollar Bug
   A MIRACLE OCCURRED AFTER Eddy
and I left the Arnold house that day. He gave up spirits, home and away.
Sissy’s mood and overall health improved, too. I cannot say that Eddy’s
sacrifice caused the upturn—it may have been the dry weather—but more
and more time passed between her coughing spells. This, in turn, lifted Muddy’s
spirits. For the next half moon, Poe House took on a breeziness I could not explain
but enjoyed nonetheless. Sissy filled our home with piano music and laughter
again, Muddy whistled during chores, even waltzing with her broom on occasion,
and Eddy wrote. He took up a quill pen each morning, prepared his ink and
paper, and wrote to my heart’s content.
   Musing occupied
me most days. There were papers to weight and desktops to tail-dust and curtain
cords to be batted when Eddy needed distraction. But when my companion took a
much-deserved break, so did I. During one such respite, I caught an omnibus to
Rittenhouse and told Midnight about Mr. Arnold and the penalty he’d paid for
killing Snip. Midnight and I decided to remain friends and nothing more since
neither of us fancied a long-distance relationship. I also made several trips
to Green Street to gossip about the ghost cat, giving the facts of the case to
George and Margaret, Silas and Samuel. During one such visit, I learned that
while Mr. and Mrs. Arnold still ran their shop, they had taken up residence a
few blocks north. As for the Snip’s grave, one could scarcely see it through
the morning glory vines.
   One
summer afternoon, after a long session at his desk, Eddy and I entered the parlor
in search of Sissy and Muddy. The two women sat on either side of the hearth in
their rocking chairs—the elder knitting, the younger darning. “It is
official,” he said to them. “I have finished ‘The Black Cat.’ It is an
excellent eulogy, if I do say so myself.”
   Sissy
set down her mending and took the scroll he offered. She unrolled it and crossed
to the open window. The sheer curtains blew into the room, fluttering against
the page.
   Eddy
put his hands on his hips.“You don’t have to read it now, my—”
   “Shhh!”
Sissy said. “It has been weeks, and I cannot wait any longer.”
   Eddy
left to pace the hallway. I stayed, alighting to Sissy’s square piano. Certain we’d
turned in our best work, I wanted to receive congratulations first. Sissy read to
herself for a spell then finished by speaking aloud. “‘The falling of other
walls had compressed the victim of my cruelty into the substance of the
freshly-spread plaster; the lime of which, with the flames, and the ammonia
from the carcass, had then accomplished the portraiture as I saw it.’” She glanced
at me, her eyebrow arched.
   She
continued,“‘Although I thus readily accounted to my reason, if not altogether
to my conscience, for the startling fact just detailed, it did not the less
fail to make a deep impression upon my fancy. For months I could not rid myself
of the phantasm of the cat; and,
during this period, there came back into my spirit a half-sentiment that
seemed, but was not, remorse, and this lack of regret sentenced me to a hell
beyond any imagined. The Black Cat had taken his revenge!’”
   Muddy
stopped knitting.“Is that it?” she asked.
   Sissy
flipped the scroll over and found it as Eddy had left it—free of letters.
“Yes, that’s it.” She dropped into her rocking chair and gave her mother a
troubled look.
   The
creak of wood called Eddy into the room. His hair stood on end, as if he’d been
pulling it again. “Well?” he asked.
   “It is…amusing,”
Sissy said.
   Muddy resumed
her knitting. The needles clicked furiously.
   “Amusing?”
His eyes turned dull. “Is it not to your liking, Virginia? I worked so hard on
it. I thought for certain—”
   She
rose to take his hands.“It was a good story, Edgar. I liked the supernatural
elements. And the main character is sufficiently mad. I’m just not sure of the ending.”
   “Did it
not satisfy you?”
   “It
lacked your usual…well, your usual severity.”
   He let
go of her and crossed to the piano. I nudged his fingers. They remained limp. From
the furrow on his brow, I knew we had more writing ahead of us.“Since the story
is for you, wife,” he said. “I will try again. It must be perfect.”
   “Don’t
make it too perfect,” Muddy added. “You need to sell it and make rent.”
   Sissy joined
him.“The parts about the cat were realistic.” She tousled the top of my head.
“Perhaps a little too realistic, considering Cattarina’s involvement in the
fire.”
   “Alleged involvement,” Eddy corrected
her. He chucked me under the chin.
   “Yes,
yes, alleged. But the ending felt, I don’t know, incomplete, as if the horror
hadn’t run its full course yet.”
   “Did
you at least like the beginning? Because I spent—”
   A knock
at the door cut him off.
   Eddy
left to greet the visitor and returned a moment later, his teeth in full view.“I have done it, ladies! I have won thePhiladelphia
Dollar contest with‘The Gold Bug.’” He waved the torn envelope, and I
wondered if someone had mailed him a bug and if they had, why it pleased him
so.
   “Husband,
I could not be prouder!” Sissy said. She clapped her hands.
   Eddy
handed the mail to Muddy and bowed.“Mr. Alburger’s rent, Mrs. Clemm. One
hundred dollars ought to cover it!”
   ***
   The
gold bug turned our lives catawampus, and Eddy forgot about the black cat
story. After the letter, Poe House overflowed with goodness. The first night,
we celebrated with a feast to shame Christmas: corned beef with brown gravy, cod
cakes, potato whip, succotash, cold slaw, rolls, and teacake. I could not
attest to the vegetables or the sweet finish, but the beef and cod were
delicious and their supply plentiful.
   In the
following days, Eddy lavished everyone with gifts. Muddy, he bought a brass
soup ladle. He called it ascepter,
and told the old woman togo forth andrule the kitchen when he gave it to
her. I did not pretend to understand this. Sissy received a new dress to
replace the one she’d burned after burying Snip. Sewn from grey-green silk, the
frock rippled about her frame as she walked, mimicking the current and hue of
the Delaware River. Tiers of bows, crafted from the same fabric, adorned the
skirt hem and neckline. She called it her newtown dress. But I thought it more a river dress. Eddy also gave her
a mother-of-pearl cameo that she pinned at her bosom and a red leatherette box
in which to store the trinket.
   And me,
he bought the most wonderful gift of all.
   One
hot, prickly afternoon, Eddy snuck from the house and left me napping on the
settee. When he returned, he called Muddy and Sissy into the parlor and set a cat-sized
wooden box on the floor in front of me.“Watch and be entertained,” he said to
the women.
   Sensing
the chest had been purchased for me, I obliged him and jumped to the floor to
investigate. Wonder of wonders! The smell escaping the interior drove me wild. I
bounced straight in the air and chattered my teeth. Had Eddy bought me a hen? When
I pawed at the lid latch, he unfastened it, revealing the treasure
inside—chicken feathers, heaps and heaps of glorious chicken feathers. I
dove into their midst, sending the smaller, lighter ones into the air.
   Sissy
and Eddy laughed.
   Even
Muddy laughed and stamped her foot.“Where did you buy such a thing, Eddy?” she
asked.
   “I
bought the box from Fitz. But the feathers came from the butcher. Didn’t pay a
penny for them.”
   I poked
my head above the box rim and let the feathers cascade around me like falling
snow. I loved the smell. I loved the squish. Far and away, this was the best
gift I’d ever received, outside of Eddy’s love. I dove again and buried myself
amidst the Poe family’s laughter. Sissy laughed loudest until a coughing spell
overtook her, and she had to be led upstairs to bed. The gold bug had fixed
many ills but could not right the one that mattered most.
   Alas, our
joy lasted only until the next wave of misery. After Sissy’s health scare, Mr.
Cook gave a copy of theDaily Forum
to Eddy that sent my companion into a rage.“‘The Gold Bug,’” he read from the
paper, “a decided humbug? What rot!” I wanted to understand the new words that
surfaced in the wake of Mr. Cook’s delivery—accusations andplagiarism—to
comfort Eddy. But alas, I could not. Then things got worse, proving once and
for all that misery plaguedevery
member of the Poe family.











    [Картинка: img_15] 
   The
Other Black Cat
   LATER THAT DAY, SAMUEL charged into
our front garden, crushing the hydrangeas with his immense frame. His white
chest puffed in and out with heavy panting.“Cattarina! Silas and I need your
help! Urgently!”
   “Whatever
is the matter?” I asked. The toad I’d been stalking hopped away.
   “Abner Arnold
is adopting another cat!”
   “Goodness
gracious.” Earlier this summer, I’d told the brothers about Mr. Arnold and his
nefarious deeds, embellishing the tale with my own exploits. Now, they
possessed all the facts of the case. “How do you know?”
   “He
came to see our Robert about adopting again.” A hydrangea petal sat atop of his
head. “After an alarming exchange, Robert threw him out of the house. Told Mr. Arnold
togo home and pray for salvation. I
think that meant‘no.’”
   “Most
assuredly,” I said. “Then what happened?”
   “Mr. Arnold
laughed! Laughed, all the way down the street.” Samuel raked the petal from his
head. “That’s not the end of it. As he left, he shouted more things about cats,
things I didn’t understand. But I know he means to look for one elsewhere. I
feel it in my whiskers.”
   “Your
whiskers? Oh, my.” I thought of my own, half-grown at this point.
   “We
can’t let that happen, Cattarina. Mr. Arnold must not be allowed to adopt
again.”
   “I
couldn’t agree more.” I walked to the gatepost and waited for him to catch up.
“Where is Silas?”
   “He was
too afraid to come. But if it’s urgent, I can persuade him to leave by the hole
in our roof. That’s how I escaped. Robert is sleeping and won’t miss us for a
while.”
   “Gather
George and Margaret Beal and Silas and meet me in your front garden. I will be
there when the sun is at mid-point.” I said on my way to the sidewalk.
   “Where
are you going?” he asked.
   “To
Rittenhouse!”
   ***
   Midnight
needed no convincing. I had but to utter Samuel’s words, and he accompanied me
to the omnibus stop for the return trip. Coaxing him onto the conveyance,
however, took every argument in my arsenal. When words failed, I bit him in the
rump, and he boarded the horse bus without further quarrel. We arrived at Mr.
Eakins’s house in time for the meeting. Per my request, George, Margaret,
Silas, and Samuel waited for us in front garden by the zinnia patch. Mr. Eakins
must’ve still been asleep since the cat social on his lawn had not drawn him
from the house.
   Once
we’d dispensed with the how-do-you-dos, I opened with a question: “How can we stop
Mr. Arnold from killing again?”
   “We
show him the error of his ways,” Margaret said. “If he repents, he will be a
changed man.”
   “My
dear,” George said, “even with the help of an entire meeting house, that sounds
impossible.”
   “I
know! I know!” Silas said. “We find a giant cage—like the one our Robert
uses, but bigger—and we trap Mr. Arnold in it. Then we set him free in
the country.”
   “He’s
not a rabbit, brother,” Samuel said.
   I glanced
at Midnight and thought how very much he looked like Snip.“Does the Thief of
Rittenhouse have anything to offer?” I asked him.
   “I’m
sorry to not be of help, but—” His eyes grew wide. “I’ve got it! We can
steal his shoes. Without them, he can’t leave the house and find another cat.”
   “Did I
not mention Mr. Arnold is a cobbler?” I said. “And that hemakes shoes?”
   Midnight’s
tail tapped the walkway.
   “We
could lure a pack of wild dogs to his house,” Samuel offered. “They would do
our work for us. I’d tie a mutton chop round Silas’s neck and—”
   “I am
against violence,” George said.
   “So am
I!” Silas added, his whiskers aquiver. “Listen to George, brother. Oh, listen!”
   “No one
is tying meat around anyone’s neck unless it is mine,” I said. “And lunch is near.”
   “What
about you, Cattarina?” Margaret asked. “You’re the cleverest molly I know. You
must have an idea you’re saving. Tell us.”
   “I am
clever, aren’t I?” I cleaned my face, pretending to think. Then I reallydid think. Mr. Arnold had useddevil andhell the night of the fire—two words I’d learned through Eddy’s
work—and he’d treated me like a creature possessed. Mrs. Arnold had also usedhaunt, another term of familiarity,
when she looked into the cellar. While I’d never faced these things in real
life, I understood their gist, at least in human terms, and I took the cobblers
for a superstitious couple. We cats have our own underworld, filled with fanged
demons and ragged souls, but it is largely relegated to lore, stories used to scare
kittens into behaving. After a fashion, I said, “I think you are right,
Margaret.”
   “I am?”
   “You
said to show Mr. Arnold the error of his ways, and I have a way to accomplish
this feat. I’m not sure he’ll repent, but he may be frightened enough to leave
cats alone. Forever. Except my plan involves a fair bit of danger...” I glanced
at Midnight. “For one of us.”
   “I’ll
do it, Cattarina, whatever it is,” Midnight said. He fixed me with a round-eyed
stare. “I can’t let another cat suffer.”
   “Tell
us your plan, Cattarina,” Samuel said.
   I narrowed
my eyes.“Snip is about to pay Mr. Arnold a visit…from beyond the grave.”
   ***
   We
reached agreement. Midnight would masquerade as Snip and scare Mr. and Mrs. Arnold
into giving up the notion of pet adoption. The rest of us would take turns
keeping watch over our pal from outside the home, lending a paw if danger
surfaced. How I worried for Midnight’s safety! Abner Arnold had already killed
once. If he killed again, I’d never forgive myself.
   In
order for Midnight to look like Snip, he needed to undergo certain
transformations. For this, he accompanied me to Poe House. Outside our garden
gate, I asked him to stand by until I secured a route since the last thing we
needed was for Muddy to give him the sweep. I crept into the kitchen and found the
old woman at the sink scrubbing a cooking pot and talking to herself. I
encountered Sissy in her top floor bedchamber, napping. Eddy—my biggest
concern—was not home. With the women of the house busy and the man of the
house elsewhere, Midnight and I stole through the parlor window and upstairs to
Eddy’s chamber.
   “You
are lucky to live here, Cattarina,” Midnight said.
   “Our
home is cozy, but it is not grand like yours,” I said.
   We leapt
to the desk and sat on the blotter pad.
   “What
does a cat need, beyond a bowl and pillow? I’m talking about what a catwants.” He blinked. “You have purpose. A
companion who sees you as an equal, not a plaything.”
   I
nudged his cheek.“Your Sarah may surprise you one day. She is young.”
   He
looked out the window, his pupils narrowing in the sun’s light. “She will never
treat me the way your Eddy treats you.”
   I could
not disagree.“You have purposehere,
Midnight, with Snip. Why don’t we work on your costume?”
   He
faced me again.“Where do we begin?”
   I
flipped the glass stopper from the inkbottle and drew my paw through the
blackish-brown liquid speckling the blotter. Then I wiped it over the snowy
mark on his chest, thinking to cover it and make him all black. The effect was
less than convincing. The ink obscured part of the fur, leaving several visible
patches of white that, when observed at a distance, appeared to form a gallows
and noose…or a broiled chicken astride a galloping horse—I could not be
sure which. Fiddlesticks. My lack of thumbs had never been a problem before.
   “How do
I look?” he asked.
   “Purrrfect,”
I said as convincingly as I could. “Now for your eye.” I jumped from the desk
and nudged Eddy’s shallow closet open, following the scent of wax to hair
pomade on the third shelf. The tin opened like a steamed mussel when it hit the
floor. I dabbed a bit on Midnight’s eyelidto seal it, and hoped it would not
cause an infection later. “There we are! You look just like Snip.”
   “Do you
have a mirror?”
   “Er, no.
We do not believe in such things in our house,” I said. “Vanity and all that.”
I walked to the doorway and waited for him. He seemed to have difficulty navigating
with one eye closed and bumped into the chair. “Are you okay?” I asked him.
   “Purrfect,”
he said.
   We were
both terrible liars.
   ***
   Unsure of
Abner Arnold’s whereabouts, Midnight and I headed to the cobbler shop first. Mr.
Arnold was not there, but we noticed his wife outside near the sassafras, a small
hand axe in her grip. It would’ve taken days to fell the colossal tree with
this implement, especially when wielded by a woman of her stature. Yet Mrs. Arnold
appeared resolute. She reared her arm back and let the blade fly. At first chop,
Mr. Fitzgerald marched from his hardware shop and into the courtyard to
confront her. He stood in the path of the woman’s swing, preventing another.
Midnight and I scurried to the mouth of the cut-through and watched the argument
unfold.
   “We’ve
been through this before, Mrs. Arnold,” Mr. Fitzgerald said. “You will not
touch this tree. Not so long as I own my shop.”
   “Go
away.” She circled the trunk and whacked it again.
   Mr. Fitzgerald
met her on the other side and grabbed the axe handle. They wrestled over the
tool, stumbling over tree roots. Mr. Cook stuck his head from Mr. Fitzgerald’s
shop and shouted, “I say, Fitz! Can I leave payment for the purchase?” He waved
a handful of money. “Well?”
   The shopkeepers
ignored him.
   “Leave
me to my work!” Mrs. Arnold screeched at Mr. Fitzgerald. “Leave me, or we will pay!”
She pushed the axe toward him, almost cutting his cheek.
   Mr. Fitzgerald
fell backward and, in doing so, wrenched the blade from her grasp. He scrambled
to his feet and pointed the weapon at her.“No,you will pay, Mrs. Arnold, if you touch this tree again! Do you
hear me?”
   She picked
up a chunk of fallen bark and wagged it in his face.“Leave me to my business,”
she said, sticking it in her pocket, “and I’ll leave you to yours.” Then she
entered her shop and slammed the door.
   Still
carrying the woman’s axe, Mr. Fitzgerald gave an exasperated cry and returned
to help Mr. Cook with his shopping.
   “What a
ruckus,” Midnight said. “Did you understand any of it?”
   “Not a
word. But Mrs. Arnold’s aversion to shade is obvious.” I approached the tree
and sniffed the newly hewn trunk. It smelled similar to the tonic Eddy
purchased every now and again—spicy and sweet.Sarsaparilla, that was the word.“If Mr. Arnold is not here, then
he is either at home or at the tavern. Which should we visit first?”
   “I’ll
leave that to your intuition,” he said. “I trust it completely.”
   We left
at once for Jolley Spirits, traveling at a slower pace than usual because of
Midnight’s closed eye. Franklin teemed with fast-rolling carriages and wagons
and gigs; it also stunk with the byproduct of progress: manure. One didn’t need
street signs to navigate Philadelphia; one only needed a nose. The sidewalks were
no less congested. Once, I lost my pal in the folds of a lady’s voluminous
skirt until he muddled through the fabric and into the light again. Oh, that
eye! We traveled east on Spring Garden, passing by the open-air market across
the street, until I spied the familiar ripped awning. Someone had placed an
empty rum barrel near the front door of the tavern, providing Midnight and I
with a platform. We sprang to the cask and peeked through the window.
   “What
does Abner Arnold look like?” Midnight asked.
   “He is
the cruel one,” I said matter-of-factly. “With a brooding face and eyes devoid
of soul.”
   Midnight
ducked his head.“There! The old man who looks like beef jerky!”
   “No,
that is Mr. Jolley. He is no friend to cats, either, but Mr. Arnold is—”
I set my paws on the glass, aghast at the figure of Mr. Arnold weaving across
the tavern floor. The fire had contorted his neck and chin, giving his skin a
molten appearance, like that of a melted candle. Bald patches, interspersed
with tufts of hair, covered his head. “He’s coming! He’s coming!” I dove from
the barrel and hid behind a stack of egg crates next to the grocer’s.
   “Cattarina,
how will I know him?” Midnight asked. His closed eye weeped from the pomade.
   Mr. Arnold
opened the door before I could answer. He hung onto the frame with hands the
color of rare lamb and leered at Midnight.“Hello, pusssssss,” he said to him.
“Don’t I…don’t I know you?” He hiccupped. “Why don’t you come home with me
tonight, pussssss? I could use the company.”
   Midnight’s
good eye opened wide.
   Mr. Arnold
looked even more hideous in the daylight. A man of competing ills, his scabby
neck and chin contrasted with the sallow tones of his cheeks, forehead…even eyes.
He laughed and gave Midnight a shove, depositing him on the sidewalk. As I shadowed
the pair to his new home—blocks from Poe House and from the help of
feline friends—dread settled in for the journey.











    [Картинка: img_16] 
   Big
Game Haunting
   MR. AND MRS. ARNOLD lived a few
blocks north of Green Street, in an area filled with shanties. The destruction
of their old house and the partial ruin of their cobbler shop had put them in league
with humans of low means. The wooden cottage had but a single story, no
shutters, cracked or broken panes in almost every window, a walkway made of
hand-dug stones, and a lopsided chimney I wagered kept more smoke in than it let
out. Mr. Arnold staggered up the walkway, opened the door for Midnight, and shooed
him inside with his boot.
   The
door shut behind them, sealing my friend inside.
   A
window ledge provided a perch from which to observe the interior. This proved
less than fruitful since Abner Arnold slumped to the front hall floor after
entering, too drunk to stand. There he fell into a deep slumber, allowing
Midnight and me the full range of his property.“Hurry!” I said to my friend
through a broken pane. “Explore every door and window. You may need an escape
route later. I have some experience with this.”
   “I’ll
look inside,” he said to me. “You look outside.” With this, he vanished into
the next room, but not before bumping into the doorframe.
   The cottage
had more in common with a produce crate than a home, yet I turned up no
extraneous portals, save for a locked back door. On to the cellar. The home’s
lower environs opened onto the street, guarded by a set of wooden panels warped
by rain. I slipped through the crack between them, certain I could escape again
if necessary, and descended to the flagstone floor below.
   Abner Arnold’s
cellar contained nothing of interest, save for a bag of quicklime, a bag of
crushed rock, and a tower of bricks in the corner. The earthen room bore but
one interesting detail—a recess in the wall near the kitchen stairs. The alcove
had the makings of a fireplace, abandoned in early stages by bricklayers. Coincidentally,
our cellar at home had a similar niche. Muddy had lined it with boards to store
her summer canning.
   A door
opened and shut above me.“I’m home, Abner!” Mrs. Arnold shouted.
   I left
the cellar and retraced my steps to the rear of the home. With growing concern
for Midnight, I became more brazen, alighting to the kitchen windowsill in full
view. On this fine and fair day, the sun on my back, the cobblers would never
catch me. Mr. Arnold had arisen from his stupor and sat with his wife at the
kitchen table. They stared not at each other but at their new guest, who’d
situated himself in the dry basin on the washstand. At first Midnight did not notice
me. So I scratched one of the intact panes, loud enough for him and no one else
to hear. Our gaze met briefly.
   “Where
did you find him?” Mrs. Arnold asked.
   “Outside
of Jolley’s,” Mr. Arnold said.
   The
window glass blunted their words.
   She
tilted her head.“Except for the white fur on his chest, he reminds me of—”
   “Don’t
say it.” Mr. Arnold crossed his arms. “Not sure if we should keep him.”
   “Of
course we should keep him,” she said. “It’s your chance to make amends.” Mrs. Arnold
rose, poured a pitcher of water into a kettle, and set the kettle on the cook
stove.
   Mr. Arnold
and Midnight eyed each other with an unbroken gaze. The room bristled with
confrontation, though Mrs. Arnold seemed oblivious. When the teakettle
whistled, the man reached for a pot of ointment in his pocket and applied it to
the wounds on his neck, chin, and hands, turning his skin shiny. I thought of the
salve Muddy put on my paws and licked my lips.“I liked the look of him
before,” he said. “Now I don’t know.”
   “He’s a
fine cat, even if he’s missing an eye,” Mrs. Arnold said. “You didn’t do it…did
you, Abner?”
   “No. I
swear it. It was missing when I found him.” He rubbed his stomach. “Don’t know
why I eat at Jolley’s. Makes me sick every time.”
   “I’ll
fix you up.” Mrs. Arnold put several heaping spoonsful of loose tea in a cup
and poured boiling water over the top of it. Then she set the refreshment on
the table before her husband.
   Mr. Arnold
sat forward and pushed the cup aside.“Do you see a picture in his fur?” He
pointed at Midnight. “There, on his chest.”
   “Now
that you mention it, the whitedoes
make a pattern.”
   “What
do you see?” he asked.
   Mrs. Arnold
chuckled and said,“Roast chicken on horseback!”
   “Bah,”
he said, rising from his chair. “You think too much about food. I’ll be in the
parlor.”
   Mr. Arnold
left the kitchen, followed by Mrs. Arnold and her tea tray a short while later.
   Midnight
hopped to the floor and approached the window.“They’re keeping me, Cattarina,
just as we planned. Let the haunting begin.”
   ***
   Throughout
the waxing moon, Samuel, Silas, George, Margaret, and I kept watch over
Midnight as he performed his otherworldly duties. This effort alone wouldn’t
convince a man like Abner Arnold to abandon cats, so we all played a part. In
the morning, I would follow him on errands, usually to the tavern, hissing and spitting
from the shadows. If he stayed home, I’d dart to his bedchamber windowsill,
careen off the glass, and leap to the ground in a continuous arc, performing
this action over and over until he lifted the sash. “W-who’s there?” he’d say,
followed by, “Is it the g-ghost cat?” Come afternoon, Silas and Samuel would sneak
out of a hole in Mr. Eakins’s roof and gallop across the Arnold’s roof. The
pitty-pat of the brothers’ footsteps kept Mr. Arnold on the threshold of
insanity until dinnertime, when George and Margaret would take over. They caterwauled
from the garden to upset Mr. Arnold’s digestion.
   These efforts
supported Midnight’sreal work inside
the home. Eye ablaze,“Snip’s ghost” would stalk our victim room to room, unnerving
him with an eerie low-pitched growl. I’d heard the sound more than once during
my rounds, and it chilled evenme. If
the man tried to sit—in the parlor, in the bedchamber—Midnight
would linger in the doorway and gaze at him with a hypnotic stare we cats reserve
for mice and birds, the kind that turns prey into pudding. “What do you want
from me? Leave me alone!” Mr. Arnold would shout.
   Whenever
the man of the house left, our pal turned into a different feline, different
even from the one who lived in Rittenhouse. I’d never seen Midnight so
vulnerable, so kitten-like. Over the days, he endeared himself to Tabitha Arnold,
becoming an indispensible companion by warming her bed, catching her spiders,
and listening to her stories. She did the same for him, scratching himjust so, moving his blanket to follow
the sun, even squiggling the odd piece of yarn for him.“There’s a good boy,”
Mrs. Arnold would croon when he sat on her lap. Yet as soon as the man returned,
Midnight would assume his role as specter.
   And
these exertions worked. I’d never seen a twitchier human than Abner Arnold. In
a misguided attempt to restore her husband—I’d witnessed my share of useless
home remedies—Mrs. Arnold plied her husband with tea every morning and
every evening. But it was little use against the liquor he consumed and the
mental anguish we doled out. Each day, his eyes grew yellower, his neck redder,
and his stomach greener, the latter evidenced by daily purging.
   Our“ghost’s” health fared only slightly better. Though the pomade had worn off
days ago, Midnight’s eyelid remained closed. Poor thing. The infection I
dreaded had become a reality. He’d showed me one afternoon while the Arnolds
attended church. “Does it look bad?” he asked. “Will I lose the eye and become
like Snip? Tell me the truth.”
   “If you
do, you will be evenmore handsome,”
I told him.
   I
should state here that these shenanigans came at no expense to the Poes. Muddy supervised
the house during my absences, but I always—always—returned home to Sissy each night to warm her. The
other cats took turns sleeping in the Arnold’s front garden so night duty
wouldn’t fall derelict. Eddy didn’t write much these days and had no need for a
muse, though a secretary might have been useful. He departed the house on more
than one morning with a messy satchel of manuscripts and scrolls, scattering a
paper trail up and down North Seventh. The first time, I tailed him as far as
the omnibus stop, and overheard him tell the driver, Mr. Coal, he wasoff to file a libel suit. I couldn’t
hazard what became of thislibel suit
for Eddy never wore anything other than his somber black uniform.
   While pulling
these capers at the Arnold house, the loose friendship I had with Silas,
Samuel, George, and Margaret tightened into a genuine troop—the Green
Street Troop—and I began to think of them as family. Midnight, however, I
thought of as more than family.
   ***
   Around
mid-summer, I met the Coon Cats by the Arnold’s garden gate as they headed home
for dinner. I’d just finished my own meal and had come to fill in for George
and Margaret since Margaret had caught a cold and could not rid herself of it. Even
though this upset our schedule, the impending storm would’ve been the death of
her. “Smell the rain? It’s coming,” I said to them. “It’s been so dry lately, I
can’t complain.”
   “I hope
we make it home before the downpour,” Silas said. “It takes my coat ages to
dry.”
   “Cattarina?”
Samuel asked. He rubbed against the picket post and scratched his back. “Do you
think Midnight has taken a liking to Mrs. Arnold? The comfort he gives her
seems more genuine these last few days.”
   “And not
at all pretend,” Silas added. He licked his nose.
   “I am not
sure,” I said. I did not wish to voice my concern to the others. “But I can
tell that Mrs. Arnold has taken a liking to him. When she is with Midnight, her
face shines.”
   “Changed
by the love of a good cat,” Silas said.
   Samuel
trilled in agreement.
   “Until
Mr. Fitzgerald enters the picture,” I said. “They fight like couple of rabid
dogs. Oh, the fist shaking and screaming!Axe
this andtree that. Humans.”
   “The
heat drives them insane,” Samuel said. “Makes them do things they normally
wouldn’t. They should try weathering it with a coat.” He turned and bit his rump,
as if mentioning the coat caused the itch. “How much longer will it take Mr. Arnold
to give up cats I wonder?”
   Thunder
rumbled in the distance.
   “I
shan’t expect much longer,” I said. “What’s the report?”
   “Mr. Arnold’s
mood is fair to poor,” he replied. “He’s been pacing a lot.”
   Silas
chimed in,“They are just about to dine—beef stock and crackers. If the
haunting doesn’t do them in, starvation will, right brother?” His stomach
rumbled. “Speaking of starvation, our Robert will be serving dinner soon. We
must be home by then.” He nudged Samuel toward the street.
   “I will
be back for the overnight shift,” Samuel said as they left. “Until then,
Cattarina!”
   As I
watched the brothers disappear down the street, I, too, wondered how much
longer it would take to break Mr. Arnold of his“fondness” for cats. Soon, I
hoped. I couldn’t see keeping this pace until fall. And Midnight’s eye needed
to be washed and cared for lest he lose it. I approached the house and jumped
to the kitchen sill to observe the goings-on.
   Tragically,
the answer to“how much longer” presented itself this very night.
   During
my brief conversation with the Coon Cats, Mr. Arnold had turned hysterical, evidenced
now by his tortured expression and gnashing teeth. Perspiration darkened the shirt
fabric under his arms, and his skin gleamed with sweat. Just as Samuel said,
the man marched back and forth across the kitchen with large, angry strides. Soup
and crackers lay on the table, untouched. Mrs. Arnold cowered in the corner. The
grave situation grew worse when Mr. Arnold snatched Midnight and deposited him
on the kitchen table, upsetting a soup bowl.“I see it! I see it!” he yelled.
   Midnight
quivered on the tabletop, no longer play-acting. I leaned in closer and bumped
my nose on the window frame. Dash it all, I’d never catch the brothers in time.
   “What
is it, Abner? What do you see?” Mrs. Arnold said from the corner.
   “The pattern
on the cat’s chest.”
   She joined
him.“For pity’s sake, have you lost your mind?”
   “It’s a
gallows and hangman’s noose.” He turned Midnight around. “See for yourself.”
   She
inspected the white fur.“I see no such thing.”
   “Look
again,” he demanded. “It’s a sign from the devil. I know it. He’s come to make
me pay for killing the black cat.”
   Killing the black cat. I
didn’t need his admission of guilt but got one all the same. I paced the sill. George
and Margaret could not be expected until morning, and the brothers were half
way to Green Street by now. If Midnight ran afoul, I’d have to save him by
myself. I inspected the cracked glass in the window. Should Ibreak it and give
my pal passage? Or should I go round front and create a diversion first? If the
old man saw me, he would recognize me from the fire, and—
   “You’re
drunk,” Mrs. Arnold said, crossing her arms.
   “No!
No! Not a drop since lunch! I swear it!” Mr. Arnold clasped his hands and
pleaded with his wife. “Oh, Tabitha, relieve this misery and confirm my greatest
suspicion, that this cat is from the underworld!” He fell to his knees and grabbed
his ears. “I am weary from the meowing and hissing and spitting—it
follows me everywhere! I cannot escape it! The fire, the ghostly imprint upon
the plaster… There is no corner of Philadelphia safe from four-legged demons,
not even my home!”
   “You
need to rest, dear,” she said. She brushed Midnight from the table and tried to
push him into the next room. I think she meant to save him, except the stubborn
tom refused to leave and hid behind the washstand instead. The old woman turned
to her husband with an insincere smile. “Abner, why don’t I fix—”
   “No
more tea! No more cats!” He sprang to his feet and grabbed her by the throat. “Mark
my words, Tabitha Arnold. This hell ends tonight.”











    [Картинка: img_17] 
   Ravages
of the Storm
   THE BROKEN PANE SHATTERED with my
charge, scattering glass to the kitchen floor.“Flee, Midnight!” I screeched. “He’s
going to kill you!”
   Abner Arnold
twisted toward the window, fingers tight around his wife’s throat. His bottom
lip trembled. “The hell c-cat lives! She’s b-back from the fire!”
   Hell cat?Fire? All hope of anonymity vanished. This mattered less compared
to a much bigger fix. Midnight had not moved from behind the washstand.“Have
you lost your wits?” I said to him. “Run, you fool! Run!”
   “I
can’t leave without her, Cattarina,” he said. “She’s my companion now.”
   “Tabitha
Arnold?”
   Abner Arnold
released his wife and lunged for the window. I could not risk another go-round
with this madman. As his hand burst through the jagged hole, I jumped from the
sill, escaping his fingers at the last instant. He withdrew and slapped the
window, depositing bloody handprints on the glass.“I will kill you, hell cat!
I will strangle you with my own two hands!”
   But
these were not the words that haunted me on my race to Green Street. They were
Midnight’s. “Save me, Cattarina!” he pleaded as I left. “Save us both!”
   ***
   The
wind blew me south toward my own neighborhood, shortening the time to Mr.
Eakins’s home. I reached his front garden with scant daylight remaining. As
luck would have it, the Coon Cats sat at the parlor window and witnessed my approach—frominside the house.“Silas! Samuel!” I
yowled to them. “Midnight is—”
   Bang, bang, bang.
   I
looked skyward. Mr. Eakins sat astride the roof peak, a hammer in his hand and
nails between his teeth.Bang, bang,
bang. He brought the tool down again and again, striking a board that
spanned a hole…just big enough for a cat to escape through. “Rain’s coming, mister,”
he muttered to himself. “Better hurry or you’ll have your indoor plumbing yet.”
   I
bounded up the walkway and laid my paws on the large front window.“Midnight’s
in trouble!” I said to the brothers. “You’ve got to help me!”
   “We
can’t,” Samuel said. “Our Robert found the hole and is sealing our route as we
speak.”
   Silas
hung his head.“We are sorry, Cattarina.”
   Bad
luck, indeed. I left without goodbyes and ran to Mr. Beal’s home down the block
to fetch George and Margaret. They, too, had been locked inside. They stood at
the front window, their faces forlorn. “It’s the rain, Cattarina. Our Thaddeus
wants to keep us safe,” Margaret said. She sneezed. “And warm. I am sicker with
this weather.”
   “There’ll
be no talking him out of it,” George said. “It’s up to you to save Midnight.”
   His
words choked me, and I experienced—if but partially—the anguish
Snip must have felt as the noose tightened around his neck.
   ***
   As I
entered the Arnold’s neighborhood, the magnificent ball of yarn disappeared
from the sky, ushering in the night. We cats operated best in the dark, so I
prayed this would be to my advantage. My heart pounded, more from my mental
state than my physical, as I dashed past rows of houses. If anything had
happened to Midnight while I’d gone for help, Mr. Arnold would pay with his life,
if not tonight, at some point in the future. I reached the familiar front gate
and skidded to a stop near the post.
   Great
Cat Above! Would this night of horrors never cease?
   Mr. Fitzgerald
stood at the couple’s door with Mrs. Arnold’s hand axe—the object of
their continued bickering. He knocked with the back of the metal head and
waited, his tall, gaunt frame mirroring the gables on either side of the eaves.
The wind blew again, lifting his thin hair. I did not move for fear of drawing
attention to myself.
   Mrs. Arnold
answered, her hair tangled and about her shoulders, the skin under her eye
swollen. The fight between her and her husband had raged on in my absence.“Mr.
Fitzgerald?” she said. She wiped her face and straightened her dress.
   “Good
evening, Mrs. Arnold.” He raised the axe and spoke in monotone. “I think we
should bury the hatchet once and for all.”
   In her
fear, she committed the unthinkable. She opened the door and let him into her
home. As the door closed behind them, sealing Midnight inside, I thought of our
salvation: Eddy.
   ***
   Sissy’s
protestations echoed down Minerva. “How could you?” she wailed from inside the
house. “How could you go back on your word?” Her voice carried far enough to
give Mr. Cook something to gossip about tomorrow. Raindrops pelted my fur,
urging me up the walkway and into our home through the open kitchen window. I located
husband and wife in the parlor. Eddy lay on the settee, his suit coat turned
inside out, his hair brushed onto his forehead. Sissy stood in the center of
the rug, arms crossed.
   “You
promised you would stop, Edgar,” Sissy said. “Promised.” She stamped her foot.
   I slunk
into the room and sat on the hearth, pondering this new turn of events. If Eddy
had taken ill, I couldn’t engage his help. The front door opened and closed,
and Muddy entered the parlor still wearing her straw bonnet, the one with faux
cherries. Much too gay a hat to be paired with her somber black dress, it nonetheless
suited her. She’d always been a woman at odds with herself. “The storm is
coming, Virginia. We’d better latch the shutters and—” She spied Eddy on
the settee. “What’s this?”
   “It’s
what it looks like, Mother,” Sissy snapped.
   The old
woman approached her son-in-law, laying a hand on his forehead.“Don’t be too
hard on him, dear. You can’t expect him to shed his condition in a single
month. Not without help.”
   Sissy
sighed.“I suppose all the money from ‘The Gold Bug’ is gone.”
   “I
saved a little back. We are not destitute.”
   Sissy
knelt and shook Eddy’s shoulder to no effect. “Husband! Wake up!” she cried.
   I would
not be so delicate. I trotted past Sissy and jumped on my companion’s chest. He
did not stir. At this very moment, Mr. Arnold or Mr. Fitzgerald could be turning
Midnight to mincemeat. With great vigor, I sharpened my claws on Eddy’s
shirtfront, catching, I hoped, a bit of skin in the process. He giggled.
Curses.
   “There
is no waking him, Cattarina,” Sissy said to me. “He is beyond help.” She
offered her mother a weak smile. “How is Mrs. West? Still complaining about
President Tyler?”
   “His Accidency? Yes, ad infinitum.” She
removed her bonnet and laid it on the mantle. “Let’s get him ready for sleep,”
she said.
   I slunk
to the hearth to think while Sissy and Muddy removed Eddy’s jacket and shoes.
Midnight needed a human’s help, but that human would not be Eddy. Sissy had
proved handy during the Glass Eye Killer affair, and she might again, I
reasoned. As I watched the dear girl drape Eddy with a crocheted blanket, I
settled on a new plan. Once Muddy went to bed, I would lure Sissy outside and
to the Arnold home where she would intervene on my behalf. Midnight could stay
here for one night and return to Rittenhouse in the morning. I got my wish when
the old woman announced, “It’s bedtime, Virginia.”
   “I’ll
be along, Mother,” she said. She knelt by Eddy and smoothed his hair from his
face. “I need another minute.”
   “As you
wish,” Muddy said. “Turn off the lamp before you come up. And check it twice. That
Arnold fire still has me spooked.”
   Once
Muddy left, Sissy whispered to Eddy,“Edgar, can you hear me? You tried. Iknow you did. Tomorrow will be better,
won’t it, my dear? We will make do.” She pulled the covers around his chin then
coughed into her hand. “I love you, husband. Good night.” She kissed him on the
forehead and rose to light a candle, still coughing all the while. When she
extinguished the lamp, I started for her, winding around her skirt to drive her
to the door.
   “Cattarina?
What do you need?” She knelt beside me and held the candle near. Her cheeks
burned brightly in the golden flicker.
   Keeping
my tail high, I trotted into the hallway.
   “Do you
want out?” She followed me to the door.
   Near
the threshold, I curved the end of my tail, calling her forward like a fish to
a hook. We did not communicate with our upper minds as Eddy and I did. That
required a deep bond, deeper even than the one Sissy and I shared. Yet her tail
reading showed promise.
   “Oh, you
clever girl,” she said. “You want me to follow you. Is there trouble like last
time? Mother won’t miss me if I’m back in a blink, and why should Eddy be the
only one behaving irresponsibly? Two can play at that.” She took her wrap from
the coat hook and opened the door. Rain blewinto the entryway, pricking my face.
Sissy coughed.“Ready when you are, Constable Claw. Lead the way.”
   I
thought of Midnight beneath the axe. Then I thought of Margaret and her sneeze
and how the wet weather made it worse. No matter how much peril Midnight faced,
I couldn’t send Sissy to an early grave. She would expire in this gale and
leave Eddy even more anguished than before. I scampered back into the hallway
and waited for her to close the door. I wheezed with relief when she did.
   “Change
your mind?” she asked.
   I sat
at the foot of the stairs, indicating her next move. She took my advice, and we
ascended to her chamber. So she wouldn’t wake Muddy, Sissy tiptoed about the
room, preparing for bed. I curled at the foot of her mattress and waited for
her to come and sleep, too. Then I would sneak out and do what I could to help
Midnight.
   All
night thunder boomed and lightning cracked, keeping Sissy awake. Every time I tried
to leave the bedchamber, she would sit forward, rub the center of her chest,
and whisper,“Where are you going, Cattarina?” and “Is there trouble? Should I
follow?” I doubted she would go out so late at night, but I could not take the
chance. She’d done as much last fall when I least expected it, and after the
argument with Eddy, her mental state appeared compromised. I tried to convince
myself Midnight had hidden in the attic to escape Mr. Arnold and Mr. Fitzgerald,
except I’d witnessed his loyalty to Mrs. Arnold. He would no more desert her
than I Eddy. Or Sissy.
   When
thunder rattled the windowpanes, I wrapped my tail around my nose and prayed
for morning. Keeping one friend alive meant dooming another.











    [Картинка: img_18] 
   The
Search Begins
   AT FIRST LIGHT, I awoke at the
foot of Sissy’s bed. Between my apprehension and hers, I got very little sleep.
My bedmate must’ve nodded off during the night, however, for she slumbered beside
me now. I looked across the room at old Muddy. I’d beaten her to the dawn. With
my thoughts still on Midnight, I slunk downstairs, unbeknownst to anyone. Eddy
snored from the parlor, right where the women had left him last night. Before
the family could wake, I unlatched the front door, loosening it with a jump and
jab, and fled into the neighborhood.
   Water
shimmered on the empty cobblestone streets, reflecting the rosy hues of sunrise.
The storm had blown over. I noted a few broken tree limbs and flipped umbrellas
as I headed north, but otherwise the Spring Garden area appeared normal—save
for the carnage at the Arnold house. I began to run and did not stop until I
reached the cobblers’ stone walkway. Setting aside thoughts of my own safety, I
leapt through the hole I’d made in the window last night and alighted to the
kitchen floor. The room stood empty. “Midnight!” I called.
   No
answer.
   “Midnight!
Are you here?”
   Silence.
   I
searched the tiny single-story for any sign of the Arnolds, Midnight…even Mr. Fitzgerald.
When that failed, I looked in the cellar. Not one person. Not one cat. Not one
drop of blood.
   ***
   Mr. Fitzgerald
stopped sweeping to watch me enter the courtyard in front of his shop.“Hello,
Catterina,” he said. “You’re out early this morning.” I sat nearest the cobbler
shop and studied the man next door. At least I had found one of the humans in
question. Had he killed Midnight and the Arnolds last night? Or had Abner and
Tabitha taken Midnight for a stroll in the Spring Garden market, as Eddy and
Sissy had done with me? Since the latter scenario was unlikely, the former
scenario, however unfortunate, took root. Nevertheless, I clung to hope. In
order to conduct a search for my friend, I needed some measure of it to
function.
   I examined
the area in front of the shoemaker workshop, looking and sniffing for any sign
of my pal. The shop’s dark interior, observed through the plate glass window,
confounded me. Tabitha Arnold always closed shop on “the Lord’s day,” or at
least that’s what Muddy called it. Yet that day had not come. I knew because the
eldest member of our house hadn’t laid out hertown dress or her black book last night in preparation.
   A man brushed
by me as I turned to leave. I recognized the stocky gentleman at once—Mr.
Pettigrew. He jiggled the handle to the Arnolds’ shop and scowled. After uttering
a few terse words I shall not repeat, he surveyed the courtyard and located Mr.
Fitzgerald. “You there!” he bellowed. “Do you know when the shoemaker will arrive?
I’ve got a bone to pick with him. Rain seeped in my shoes last night and ruined
my stockings.”
   “I
imagine the store will be closed today,” Mr. Fitzgerald said. “The Arnolds are
suffering from…maladies. I called on them last night, and they were doing poorly.
Come back tomorrow.” He brushed the collected debris into the street and
entered his shop.
   “Maladies,”
Mr. Pettigrew said under his breath. He looked me. “Stay away from here, pussycat.
Mr. Arnold doesn’t like your kind.” With a tip of his hat, he left the way he
came, the soles of his shoe flapping on the sidewalk.
   Though
I could not imagine Mr. Fitzgerald cleaving anyone, least of all Midnight, I entered
his shop just in case. It presented no new evidence, so I left for Mr. Beal’s
house to speak to George and Margaret, cutting through the alley. The Quaker
Cats, too, had set out early, and I caught them near the razed Arnold home. The
lot had been cleared shortly after the fire. In recent days, bricklayers had built
a maze upon the blank earth. I’d watched them at their work, a dull affair
second only to Muddy’s scrubbing of the walkway.
   “We
were coming to find you,” George said. “The Coon Cats are still with Mr. Eakins
and won’t be leaving today. Maybe not even tomorrow. Any word on Midnight?”
   “No,
haven’t seen him. And worse, the Arnold house is empty.”
   “Empty?”
Margaret said with a sniffle. “Where could they have gone?”
   “I
intend to find out,” I said. “But I need your help.”
   “We are
always here to help,” George said. He lowered his head. “Except for last night.
Margaret and I are sorry, Cattarina.”
   “Truly
sorry,” Margaret said. “But Mr. Beale locked all the windows and
doors—even the shutters—with the coming storm. We couldn’t leave.
And with my cold, it would’ve been too dangerous.” She sneezed, illustrating
her point.
   “If
it’s anyone’s fault, it’s mine.” I sighed. “It was my plan.”
   “And
now Midnight’s dead,” Margaret said forlornly.
   “No, we
mustn’t think like that,” I said. “Grief will slow our efforts.”
   “Don’t
worry, Cattarina. We’ll turn over all of Philadelphia if we have to,” George
said. “Midnight will surface.”
   ***
   George
and Margaret agreed to search the streets while I returned to the Arnolds’ residence
to make sure I hadn’t missed anything. Since I’d botched things last night, I
decided to once again enlist human help. Sissy’s keen eye rivaled my own, and Eddy’s
mind worked in ways beyond comprehension. At this point, I would even take
Muddy if I could push her from the kitchen. Across the street from Poe House, I
caught Eddy and Sissy leaving a cab. From their costume, they had come from a
grand affair. Eddy wore his brocade waistcoat he saved for readings, and Sissy had
donned her new river dress. Arm in arm, the couple lingered on the sidewalk, in
no particular hurry to go home. I watched them for longer than I should have,
considering Midnight’s predicament. Perhaps sentimentality had gotten the best
of me, but I had never seen Eddy so happy, so far from the melancholies of last
autumn. I wanted him to stay that way forever. My one regret? ThatI had not been the one to bring about
the change.
   The
carriage driver snapped the whip and urged the horse down the street. Then a
pony cart driven by a freckle-faced girl whizzed past. What traffic! When the
road cleared, I joined the pair mid-conversation.“Was the meeting to your
liking?” Sissy asked Eddy. She’d curled her hair. Two black locks hung in spirals
on either side of her ears. A closed fan dangled from her wrist.
   “The
Sons of Temperance is a fine organization,” Eddy said. “I should’ve attended a
meeting sooner, but I was waiting for the right moment.”
   “And it
came.”
   He
patted her hand.“I am sorry, Virginia.”
   She
gazed at him.“Today we start anew, Edgar.”
   It did
this cat good to see her companion so full of merriment. But I had a task and
could not be deterred. I waited for them to begin walking then introduced
myself to their cadence. This step could not be skipped when attempting a feat
of this complexity. It was one thing to bring a human from parlor to kitchen;
it was quite another to guide them through the neighborhood.
   “Good day,
Catters,” Eddy said. “I trust you slept well.”
   “Oh,
she didn’t sleep well at all,” Sissy said, looking me over. “Poor thing
wouldn’t stay put last night. Must’ve been the storm.”
   I
ziggety-zagged in front of them, orchestrating their strides without raising
suspicion. They paid me no mind and continued chatting as they passed Poe
House.
   “It’s
odd that Tabitha Arnold wasn’t at the meeting,” she said. “She even urged me to
go. Told me she’d meet me there.”
   “I
didn’t mind,” he said. “It gave me more time with my beloved.”
   I pushed
them north past the intersection of Green Street.
   “An afternoon
stroll is an exquisite idea,” Sissy said. She opened her fan and waved herself.
   “I
thought it was your idea,” Eddy said.
   “As
long as it wassomeone’s idea.” She
laughed and hugged her husband’s arm tighter.
   We
navigated wicker buggies filled with tots and toddlers wielding horehound
sticks. The tiny humans delighted Sissy, for she smiled and pointed at each
one, remarking on theircherub cheeks
andangelic smiles. I stayed the
course, thinking solely of Midnight, and detoured them west toward the Arnolds’
home.
   She
closed her fan.“Do you ever want children?”
   “What
has gotten into you, Virginia?”
   “On
days like this, when you are…” She cast her eyes downward. “…healthy, I think
what a wonderful father you would make.”
   “We’ve
been through this before,” Eddy said. “It would be too taxing for you.”
   She bit
her lip then said,“Are you sad?”
   “I am
always sad, my wife. But you and you alone make me better. You are my queen in
this kingdom by the sea.” He gave her a wink.
   “That’s
a lovely sentiment, Edgar. You must think about putting it to verse.” She laid
her head on his shoulder and continued in silence.
   Ziggety-zag,
ziggety-zag, all the way to the cobblers’ home. Exhausting work, but I’d done
it. I deposited them in front of Abner Arnold’s house and turned up the
walkway. They did not follow. Running out of both patience and time, I yowled.
And good.
   “I
think she means for us to join her,” Sissy said. She pulled Eddy to the door. “Who
could live here, I wonder? Do we know anyone on Logan Street? What a gay
adventure!”
   “I am game
for an escapade.” He rapped the door with his knuckles. His enthusiasm vanished
when Abner Arnold answered the door.
   Frightened,
I dashed behind the folds of Sissy’s skirt. We would never gain access to the
home, now that the cobbler was home. Midnight could be inside, in need of my
help, and I could not give it. I peeked around the volume of silk and watched
the exchange.
   “What
do you want?” Mr. Arnold said. His shirt had come untucked and hung about his
waist like a short dressing gown. Even from behind Sissy’s skirt, I caught the
scent of rum. He scratched the peeling scabs on his chin and neck.
   Sissy regained
her composure first.“We are looking for your wife, Tabitha,” she said. “Is she
here?”
   “No, and you can thank Mr. Fitzgerald for
that,” he said. “She ran off with him last night. Can’t trust the Irish, can
you?” He swayed, leaning against the doorframe for support. “If he tells you
any different, he’s a liar the size of Pennsylvania.” He rubbed his stomach and
winced.
   “Your
wife left you?” Eddy asked.
   Mr. Arnold
pushed the door open with his foot.“You see her inside? You see her at the
shop?” He scowled. “Didn’t think so.”
   “Did
she give a reason?” Eddy asked. I could not see his face, but his voice held
genuine concern.
   “Women
don’t need a reason, do they?” Mr. Arnold said, casting an eye at Sissy. “Don’t
drink, Abner, it’s not good for you,” he said in a high timbre. “Don’t go to
Jolley’s tonight, Abner, you’ll put us in the poor house.” He spat on the
ground and lowered his pitch to normal. “Bah! Good riddance to her, and good
riddance to you.” With that, he slammed the door in our face.
   Eddy
didn’t move. He looked at his shoes. Mr. Arnold had given him something to
think about, though I knew not what.
   Sissy
took his hand.“Husband? Are you well?”
   He lifted
his gaze and searched her face, his eyes glassy and wet.“I amvery well today, thank you, Mrs. Poe.”
   ***
   Sissy
waited until we’d reached North Seventh before speaking of the cobblers. “Husband,
something is wrong. I do not trust Mr. Arnold’s story. Why would Mrs. Arnold
run away with Mr. Fitzgerald? It doesn’t make sense.”
   “I’ll
say. I never pegged ol’ Fitz as a lover.” His mood had brightened since our chat
with the cat killer.
   “Eddy!”
she said. “That is not what I mean! And lower your voice. I don’t want anyone
hearing you saythatword in public.”
   “What?Fitz?” Eddy said.
   “Oh,
how you tease.” Sissy slapped him on the arm with her fan.
   I
trailed several lengths behind them, disheartened by countless failures. If I
didn’t find Midnight soon, I’d have start looking for his grave. What had I
done? When I thought of George and Margaret, I trotted ahead, in line with my
companion. Maybe the Quaker Cats had discovered Midnight this morning, alive
and well.
   “I
think Tabitha Arnold could be in real trouble,” Sissy said. “Mr. Arnold gave me
a queer feeling. He had an untamed look about him, like a hungry tiger.”
   “A hungry
tiger! What wild imaginings!” Eddy chuckled. “May I remind you, Mrs. Poe, that you
wrongly suspected Mr. Fitzgerald of killing Pluto. Not everyone can rationalize
like my Detective Dupin.” He steered them around a window-shopping couple
before resuming their path on the sidewalk. I stepped onto the cobblestones to
accommodate the detour. “Mind the street, Catters,” he said to me. “Mr. Arnold
may drive his carriage down the street and kill the lot of us.” He waved his
hand. “In one pass.”
   “Make
fun if you will,” Sissy said. Her earlocks bobbed as she spoke. “But Tabitha
told me she’d be at the temperance meeting this morning. She would never close
shop on a Saturday. And by the by, Mr. Fitzgerald’s not out of the stew pot yet.
He and Tabitha have been arguing over that tree for months. What if he did
something to her—”
   “My
dear! I have heard enough! We will speak to Mr. Fitzgerald and get the story
from him.”
   It
didn’t take long to reach the shops of Franklin Street. We discovered Mr. Fitzgerald
sitting in the shade of the sassafras tree, his back to the trunk, sipping a
cool drink. I wasn’t sure we’d find Midnight here, but my ideas had run their
course. After pleasantries about the weather—did they not understand the urgency?—Eddy
and Sissy recounted much of what they said on the walk. It did not match word
for word but contained many of the same themes, includingTabitha Arnold. This gave me courage, for if we found her, we’d probably
find my pal.
   “Abner Arnold
is a right fibber,” Mr. Fitzgerald said. “It’s true. I paid them a visit last
night. But I left alone, coming back to the store to tidy up. There’s been a
run on buckets since the fire at their house, and I can’t keep the display in
order.” He took another sip from the glass. I admired the bony apple bobbing along
his neck.
   “How lucrative,”
Eddy said.
   Sissy elbowed
her husband.“Did Mrs. Arnold seem well, Mr. Fitzgerald?”
   “Not at
all. In fact, I think she and Mr. Arnold had been arguing. A real knock-about
if you ask me. I’d bet anything the old man had just come from the grog shop.”
He winked at me. “You wouldn’t know anything about that, would you, Cattarina?
You’re a lady.”
   I
turned to show off my tail.
   “Thank
you, Mr. Fitzgerald. You’ve been most helpful,” Sissy said. She pulled her
husband in front of the cobbler shop, and I joined them. “You see!” she
whispered. “Mrs. Arnoldis in
trouble.”
   Eddy
frowned.“I think we should call Constable Harkness.”
   I
swiveled my ears, catching the name. Though I did not hold much stock in
Constable Harkness’s rationation skills, hedid
serve on the side of justice. A shame he hadn’t been summoned for Snip’s
killing. This could have all been avoided.











    [Картинка: img_19] 
   The
Return of Constable Harkness
   CONSTABLE HARKNESS LIVED ON
Green Street, but much farther west than I could’ve traveled by paw—nearly
half way to the Schuylkill River, by all accounts. For expediency’s sake, Eddy
hailed a private car for us, an open carriage meant, I was certain, for bird
watching. Iso admired the acrobatics
of the purple martin. Presently, the driver parked in front of a brownstone
hung with potted ferns. Smoke filled the sky here, blanketing the firmament with
the haze of burnt metal. This stench ruined an otherwise handsome neighborhood.
   We strode
the sidewalk, and Sissy coughed straightaway in the foul air. Eddy touched her
shoulder with concern, but she proceeded to the constable’s stoop and rapped on
the door. We waited. The constable shuffled inside, moving and shifting things
around, as if our arrival had taken him from an important task. “I’ll be right
back, Matilda,” he said from the interior. “Never fear.”
   The
door opened.
   An
older, white-haired gentleman I hadn’t seen since the fall stood before us in a
brown suit and blue waistcoat. I hadn’t been the only one to pack on flesh
since our move, though Constable Harkness wore it better than I. He held a
watering pot that dripped onto the toes of his shoes. “May I help you?” he
asked.
   Sissy assumed
the lead.“We’ve come to—”
   “By
God, it’s you! It’s really you!” the constable said to her. He smiled at me, teeth
hidden by his bushy mustache. “And you’ve brought that cat of yours! Fine
specimen, she is. Beautiful tortoiseshell.”
   A cough
escaped her mouth instead of a greeting.
   “Come in! Come in! The air is terrible
here.” The older man led us, ratherher
down the tapestry hall runner.“You can thank the iron works for the smoke. The
factory’s almost next door.” We entered the parlor. On my last visit, I’d
stayed outside and eavesdropped from the window. The interior had a brassy, bright
feel, more so than I would’ve imagined given the man’s tarnished demeanor. “Howhave you been? Why I haven’t seen you since—”
   “Since
you came to our house on Coates,” Sissy added.
   “Harumph,
yes, of course,” he said.
   The
constable offered us the couch, a tufted affair that poked my hindquarters with
buttons. Eddy and Sissy sat on either side of me, and I made a home between
their knees. Skulls, a strange brass tube, a raccoon tail, glass orbs in every
size, a collection of dead butterflies, and other oddities beckoned me from a
large curio cupboard spanning the wall adjacent to the fireplace. While these
items intrigued me, they paled when compared to the large ivy sitting atop the
cabinetry. A fantastical plant, its numerous tendrils tumbled over the woodwork
and cascaded toward the floor, giving one the impression they had entered not a
brownstone, but a jungle. I longed to scale the greenery and explore the upper environs.
Alas, a diversion was out of the question. Any tomfoolery on my part would
unravel the investigation faster than lace tatting between the claws. Muddy had
still not forgiven me for shredding her favorite doily.
   “So you
and Constable Harkness are acquaintances?” Eddy asked his wife. “You spoke only
briefly last October.”
   Sissy
shook her head at Constable Harkness. Eddy did not catch it as I did.
   “I am a
memorable fellow,” the constable said to him. He set his watering can on a side
table.
   “And my
cat?” Eddy asked.
   “Cattarina?
Why I barely know her,” he replied.
   When the
constable called me, I jumped from the couch and rubbed along his pant leg,
ingratiating myself to him. I had escaped parrot prison, battled fire, grappled
with a killer, survived bodily harm, and yetthis act took the most courage. I am not, nor have I ever been one
to grovel. Nevertheless, Constable Harkness had the resources to find Midnight.
The older gentleman sidestepped my generous deposit of fur. Odd. Had he not spoken
my name? He retreated to a wingback chair near the fireplace and flapped his
fingers, discouraging me from further attempts.
   “Barely know her. I see,” Eddy said. He
turned to Sissy.
   Her
cheeks flushed more than usual.“We should explain ourselves, Constable
Harkness,” she said. “We have much to tell.”
   “It’s
not a social call?” He glanced at the sprawling plant. “Matilda and I get so
few.”
   “No,
it’s a matter of urgency,” Eddy said. “We fear a woman’s been harmed.”
   The
constable scowled and clutched the arms of his chair.“Mr. Poe, you should work
on your story openings. You might’ve told me this in the first place. Now take the
work of Washington Irving—”
   Eddy shot
to his feet.“Washington Irving is much overrated. And there is nothing wrong
with my storytelling.”
   “Really,
sir, I must object. Washington Irving is a brilliant writer, a
visionary—”
   “Visionary?
I’ll grant you Irving is a pioneer. Butsir,
he is no writer.”
   Sissy
tugged Eddy’s coat sleeve and coaxed him back to the couch of many buttons.
“Husband, we are here to discuss Mrs. Arnold, not debate literature.”
   I
jumped on his lap to keep him seated. Midnight could not afford another delay.
   Eddy stroked
my back and settled onto the cushions. Once he began the oft-told story, I left
him in favor of the curio cabinet. I pawed open the door to inspect the skulls.
Some belonged to humans, others belonged to dogs and rabbits, others still
belonged to species of unknown origin. I wondered if the gentleman had hunted
them himself. If so, my estimation of him had just increased whiskerfold.
   “Thoseare suspicious circumstances, Mr. Poe,” he
said at the end of Eddy’s tale. “What is your account, Mrs. Poe?”
   Eddy
crossed his armsand his legs.“Yes,
Mrs. Poe, I am awaiting your account as well. Yourfull andtruthful account.
Will you give it?”
   She
laughed gaily, an odd response to what should have been a serious conversation.“You must excuse my husband, Constable. We’ve had an unsettling day. And we owe
it to Abner Arnold. He is up to mischief, I know it.” She fixed the older man
with a dark stare. “Ifeel it.”
   Constable
Harkness pursed his lips then said,“I don’t like the sound of that Arnold
fellow. I’ll round up the watchmen and question the neighbors, new and old. Don’t
worry, Mrs. Poe. We’ll find Tabitha Arnold if she’s alive.” He offered his hand
to her, helping her from the couch. “Or even if she’s dead.”
   ***
   “Quiet!
Quiet!” Constable Harkness shouted over the voices. A familiar crowd assembled near
Mr. Arnold’s house on Logan, evidently at the behest of the watchmen. A pawful
of these black-cloaked enforcers lined the sidewalk, spacing themselves like
crows on a clothesline. They held their long,pointed poles at an angle,
forming a crisscross between each man to keep people from wandering. I did not
count Watchman Smythe among their number. A pity. I’d met him during my last
adventure and considered him trustworthy.
   “Thank
you all for coming,” the constable said to the people once they’d settled. “If
you are forthcoming, I will be brief. If you are not, you will stand beneath
this hellish summer sun until I am satisfied.” He mopped his brow with a
handkerchief and tucked it in his waistcoat pocket.
   I climbed
to Eddy’s shoulder and surveyed the gathering over the top of Sissy’s bonnet: Mr.
Eakins, Mr. Cook, Mr. Fitzgerald, Mr. Pettigrew, Mr. Jolley, even the old lady
with the parasol whom we’d spoken to near the Arnold’s old home, and of course,
Abner Arnold. Anyone with knowledge of the cobblers had been invited. I
couldn’t have done a better job if I’d picked them myself. The watchmen must
have escorted them here while Eddy, Sissy, and I dined at home with Muddy.
   “Can we
get on with this nonsense?” Mr. Jolley asked. “I left my cook in charge of the
till, and I’ll bet my dying breath he’s filching it.”
   “Very
well,” Constable Harkness said. “Today, Mr. E. A. Poe and his wife paid me a
visit, claiming that a Mrs. Tabitha Arnold, citizen of the Spring Garden
District, has gone missing from her home.This
home.” He motioned to the shanty behind him.
   Abner Arnold
leaned against the garden gate, his shirt collar damp with sweat. His
perspiration didn’t register as peculiar on a summer day. The sun had dampened
my coat, too. But when combined with his vacant stare and yellowing skin, it pronounced
health problems for all to see. This illness had affected his reason, for he
seemed less concerned with the citizens gathered against him than the object in
his pocket, which he fingered beneath the fabric.
   “We’ve heard
as much from the watchmen,” Mr. Pettigrew shouted. “Tell us why we’re here.”
   “There
were too many conflicting stories about the woman,” the constable said. “So I
brought you here to sort it out. Some believe Abner Arnold is behind her
disappearance. Who holds this opinion? Speak now.”
   “Oh,
me,” Mr. Eakins said. “Anyone who can kill a cat is deranged enough to kill a
human.” He scratched his elbow.
   “Kill a
cat?” Constable Harkness asked.
   Kill a cat. Yes,now they were snapping the reins. What
had taken me a day to solve had taken these people over a moon. Poe family
excluded, most humans exhibited a feebleness of mind I found appalling. For
this very reason, cats allowed themselves to be domesticated. Had we not,
humans would have gone extinct from sheer stupidity. One had only to witness
the use of a chamber pot to agree.
   “Yes,”
Mr. Eakins said. “I set him up with a black tom named Pluto. A few weeks later,
the poor creature was hung from a tree near his shop…with its eye gouged out! Who
else could have done it?” He motioned to the cobbler with a gnarled finger. “Out
with it, Arnold. Acknowledge the corn.”
   The
accusation woke Mr. Arnold from his daze, and he took his hand from his pocket,
giving full attention to the crowd.
   “It’s
true,” Mr. Pettigrew said. “Pluto’s ghost visited that same night, burning Mr. Arnold’s
house down and leaving a demonic mark as a warning for all to see.”
   Eddy
touched my tail.“A fine likeness of you, eh, Catters?” he whispered.
   I was
too busy avoiding Mr. Arnold’s cold stare to reply. The man had noticed my
personage atop Eddy’s shoulder and gazed at me with consternation, as if he
recognized me but couldn’t sort the particulars.Pardon, but do we frequent the same stationer’s? The same grocer’s? No,
no, I burned your house down and drove you insane. Ah! That clears it up! Good day,
miss! The few instances we’d met, he’d been inebriated, and I attributed his
memory loss to this. For once, I thanked liquor.
   The
lady with the parasol nodded.“You won’t find a more pickled human being than
Abner Arnold. The devil drove him to drink, and the drink drove him to kill. I
lived next to him on Green Street.”
   “What superstition!” Constable Harkness
said. “Who hasevidence of the cat’s
killing?”
   “I do,”
Sissy said. She opened her white tasseled wrist bag—she’d secured the
carryall after our luncheon—and produced the page I’d torn from Mr.
Eakins’s Book of Cats. “This proves Mr. Eakins gave Mr. Arnold the black cat.
It contains the Arnolds’ old address and a drawing of thecreature.” She ignored
Eddy’s sharp inhale and offered the clue to the constable. “And many witnessed Pluto
hanging from the tree. The courts aren’t interested in animal cruelty, I know.
But this proves he’s capable of dreadful things.”
   Mr.
Eakins gave a little hop and clap.“Hee! That came from my book all right. But
I don’t know howyou got it, Mrs. Poe.”
   “I-I
found it in the street,” she said. She glanced at me, then back to the crowd.
“Mr. Fitzgerald, tell everyone about the rope Abner Arnold bought from your
shop.”
   Eddy
gave Sissy a wry smile and whispered,“This isyour affair, not the constable’s, is it not? Superb orchestration,
my dear. Detective Dupin may yet have a rival.”
   Sissy
put her finger to her lips.
   “That’s
right, Mrs. Poe,” Mr. Fitzgerald said. With his near-emaciated frame, he was
the only one among us not sweating. “He bought the rope from me in May. I’ve
long suspected Abner of the cat’s hanging. And just last night, I witnessed the
couple arguing.”
   Abner Arnold
forgot about me. He shook his head as a dog might after a good rain shower then
took a series of slow, labored steps toward Mr. Fitzgerald. Had he been this
feeble last night, Midnight might’ve escaped unharmed. I wondered what had
caused the stark change in his personality.
   “This
is all very interesting,” Constable Harkness said, “but I fail to see how the
killing of a cat—”
   “Forget
the cat,” Mr. Arnold said with a rasp in his throat. “Fitzgerald took Tabitha from
me. Then he killed her!”
   Whispers
rose from the crowd, the loudest of which came from Mr. Pettigrew,“Pshaw, that
Irishman couldn’t scare a crow from a cornfield.”
   The
watchmen knocked their poles together, quieting the crowd.
   Mr. Arnold
screwed himself up to his full height, still a tail-length shorter than Mr. Fitzgerald.“Fitzgerald! Tell everyone how you came to my house last night with an axe.” He
wiped his mouth with his jacket sleeve.
   Mr. Fitzgerald
laid his hands alongside his cheeks.“I’m afraid it’s true.”
   “You
turned up last night to threaten me. Said if I didn’t let you leave with my
wife, you’d give me the blade.” He made a chopping motion against his scarred neck.
“You gave it to her instead.”
   The
lady with the parasol gasped.
   “No!”
Mr. Fitzgerald said. “You’re lying!”
   I
yawned. Talk, talk, talk. We needed claws on the ground and tails in the air. And
why had no one thought to search the home? I hopped to the ground and wove my
way to the garden gate, avoiding the many feet. Something about this morning’s exploration
bothered me, though I could not say what. I thought back to my investigation, going
over each room in my mind. I remembered nothing of importance. I’d found the
house in perfect order and the cellar empty.
   The
dispute continued behind me.
   “Constable Harkness!” It was Mr. Cook’s turn.
“I saw the shopkeepers arguing a few weeks back, something about a tree. Mrs. Arnold
wanted to chop it down, and Mr. Fitzgerald didn’t. They came at each other,
hammer and tongs, I tell you. Then he finished the fight by saying he’d make
herpay if she touched the tree again.”
   Mr. Fitzgerald
pinched the bridge of his nose.
   Mr.
Pettigrew spoke next.“Mr. Fitzgerald had plenty of answers when I visited him
this morning. He knew Mrs. Arnold wouldn’t be around to open her store. It was
all very mysterioussss.” He drew out the last word.
   “Whose
side are you on, Pettigrew?” Constable Harkness said.
   “Fitz
is no murderer,” Eddy announced to the crowd. I so admired his speaking voice.
He saved it for recitation since it commanded full attention—as it did
now. All listeners turned to him. “Mrs. Poe and I are united in our support.”
   “I
could not agree with my husband more,” Sissy said.
   “Thank
you,” Mr. Fitzgerald said. “I am gladsomeone
will vouch for me.”
   I sat
on the walkway and swiveled my ears. Mr. Arnold had shut the front door, but I
had other means of entry. I reached the kitchen window to discover a rag
stuffed in the broken windowpane. Drat. I could not enter here. I retraced my
steps to catch Mr. Fitzgerald and Mr. Arnold on the brink of physical
confrontation. They faced each other, hands balled into fists.
   “You
killed her, Arnold,” Mr. Fitzgerald said. “And are looking to blame me.”
   “Not
true! Not true!” Mr. Arnold shouted to the listeners. “Mr. Fitzgerald did it.
I’ve said it before, and I’ll say it again, you can’t trust the Irish.”
   Mr. Fitzgerald
charged Mr. Arnold and knocked him to the ground. The meaning ofIrisheluded me, but it held power. The
two men grappled on the sidewalk, punching and flailing and kicking. One of the
watchmen inserted his pole between the men and pried them apart. This did not please
the shopkeepers, and the men rejoined to finish the battle. At Constable
Harkness’s signal, the full complement of watchmen intervened. I marveled at
the writhing pile of humans. Extinction indeed.
   On my
second sweep, I detected an indistinct yelp, so faint I could not divine its
direction. Then I heard it again. It could’ve been my imagination. Or the wind.
Nonetheless, I trotted around the house to investigate, pausing before the
cellar doors. I had examined the earthen room this morning and found it empty. Empty?
Had I not seen the bag of cement and the tower of bricks? No, they’d been
missing. I’d found another clue! As before, I squeezed through the warped
opening and descended the street staircase into darkness. A respite from the
sun, the damp stone floor welcomed my paws. The sharp odor of quicklime
permeated the air, along with a weaker but no less nauseating smell. I sneezed.
   “Help
me,” someone said.
   I froze
near the kitchen staircase, frightened by the request.
   “Oh,
won’t somebody help me.” The weak but familiar plea arose from the wall to my
right. My tail switched side to side. Someone had placed bricks over the recess
near the stairs, entombing my pal between the layers. Damnation. The new
masonry resembled the old, and in my haste this morning, I’d failed to notice
the damp mortar.
   “Don’t
worry, Midnight!” I yowled. “I have found you!”











    [Картинка: img_20] 
   Midnight’s
Tale
   “I WILL FREE YOU,” I said to
Midnight. “But for kitty’s sake, how did you become trapped behind this wall? Masonry
is not the swiftest of endeavors.”
   “I had
no choice,” he said.
   I moved
closer to hear him and caught another whiff of the stench. At least it was not
Midnight’s rotting flesh I smelled. “Speak louder,” I told him.
   Midnight
raised his voice.“When you left last night, Mr. Arnold became enraged. He took
the anger he had for you and turned it on Tabitha. He tossed dishes, turned
over chairs. And then…and then he grabbed Tabitha by the neck again. I was
convinced he would kill her on the spot. Then someone knocked on the door and
interrupted him.”
   “Mr. Fitzgerald.”
   “Yes, how
did you know?”
   “It
doesn’t matter,” I said. “Please continue.”
   “Mr. Arnold
blew like the north wind when Mr. Fitzgerald arrived. As soon as he spied the
axe the other man had brought, though, he put on a good face and invited him
into the parlor. I couldn’t believe the civility! They talked abouttrees andgrudgesandburying the
hatchet. You’d have taken them for a couple of nannies strolling through Rittenhouse
Square! At the end of everything, Mr. Fitzgerald saidI’m sorry and handed the axe to Mr. Arnold. I’m sure you can guess this
sealed our fate. Once the tall, bony gent left, Mr. Arnold turned to his wife
with a look I never want to see on another human being as long as I live, a
look of gleeful hatred. She fled through the kitchen and into the cellar, and
I, of course, followed. The lock did not catch in time. I still don’t know why
she chose to hide instead escaping to the street.”
   “Humans
do not think when they are afraid,” I offered.
   “Mr. Arnold
crashed through the door and down the steps. With a cruel laugh, he swung the
axe, catching Tabitha in the head.”
   “Goodness
gracious. Another murder. This one should land him in the penitentiary.”
   “Mr. Arnold
must have been planning it all the while.”
   “Indeed,”
I said. “I found his masonry supplies at the start of our adventure, but I
could not have guessed their purpose.”
   “The
fiend shoved her body in the alcove, and when he turned his back to prepare the
mortar, I crept in behind Tabitha. There I hid for the duration.”
   “Whatever
for?”
   “She is
my companion!” he wailed. “Would you leave your Eddy?”
   “No.
Not even in death,” I said. “I will save you, Midnight. Let me return to my
humans, and—”
   “Don’t abandon
me again, Cattarina!” he cried. “It’s very dark in here. And my perch is…uncertain.”
   My
heart beat a little faster.“Do not be frightened,” I said. “Take comfort in
the words of Meowléiere. ‘The greater the
obstacle, the more glory in overcoming it’.”
   “Do not
quote at a time like this!” he screeched.
   “Sorry,”
I said. “The burden of verbosity is heavy. There are moments when—”
   “Cattarina
Poe!”
   “Yes,
yes, of course.” I took a deep breath and let out a scathing caterwaul that
echoed throughout the chamber. I gave another and another until the doors at
the street opened.
   A shaft
of sunlight filled the cellar. I dashed to the opening, expecting to find Eddy.
The misshapen face of Abner Arnold loomed above me.











    [Картинка: img_21] 
   The
Specter of Memory
   ABNER ARNOLD REACHED FOR me and
missed. I longed to slip through the portal and into the crowd above, but he
blocked the entrance. So I repeated Mrs. Arnold’s mistake and looked for a
hiding place in the interior. Poor woman, had she been a cat, she might’ve
evaded her husband, for I found one straight away. I bounded up the kitchen
staircase, careened off the top step, and sprang to a wooden beam, coming to
rest in the space above the floor reserved for bats. Mr. Arnold had just entered
the cellar when Eddy charged down the street entrance steps, followed by Sissy,
Muddy, the constable, Mr. Fitzgerald, and the cadre of watchmen. The remainder must
have taken their leave in the interim, for they did not appear next.
   “Unhand
my Cattarina, sir! Do not touch a single whisker!” Eddy said to Mr. Arnold. “Or
you will feel my fists upon your head!”
   Fear prevented
me from leaping into Eddy’s arms. If I did, would the cobbler turn his fury on
my companion, as he had on his own wife? Midnight’s cautionary tale chilled me,
and I did not wish a similar version to play out here and now. Myhaunting performance had rendered Mr. Arnold
insane. If the memory fog lifted and he recognized me as the same apparition
from before, unpleasant would not begin to describe the outcome.
   I
walked along the joist and sat above the group. I convinced myself the
situation called for strategy and patience, two things a huntress like me had
in great supply. Moreover, now that
Eddy and Sissy—two of the most capable humans in existence—had
arrived, the wall puzzle would soon be solved, Midnight would be freed, and
Constable Harkness would apprehend Mr. Arnold. I likened these machinations to
the guts of Muddy’s mantle clock, and they must not be disturbed. Or eaten. I
wondered sometimes how the old woman tolerated me. Slowly, very slowly, I
lifted my tail and withdrew it from sight, laying it next to me on the wooden beam.
   “Your
cat?” Mr. Arnold said. “She’s Satan’s cat. And she’s here somewhere. I’ll find
her yet.”
   Eddy grabbed
the man’s lapels, but Mr. Fitzgerald intervened, wresting my companion away. “Let
the law handle him, Poe,” he said. “He’s finished.”
   Sissy coughed
into her handkerchief.“What is that smell?”
   “It’s
quicklime,” Mr. Fitzgerald said. “I’d know it anywhere. Mr. Arnold bought a bag
from me a week ago.”
   “More
lies,” Mr. Arnold said. He wiped sweat from the back of his enflamed neck.
   A large
cloth sack wedged between the joists by the stairs drew my attention. With perfect
balance, I walked toward the item along the narrow beam. The bag contained the
dry, gritty material I’d seen the masons mix at the new home site on Green
Street. I glanced at Mr. Arnold’s head below. The tufts of burned hair formed a
forest of stumps on his scalp.
   “Enough
talk,” Constable Harkness said. “Abner Arnold, now that we are in your house,
do I have your permission to search it?”
   “Go
right ahead,” he said. The cobbler ascended the steps and flung open the kitchen
door. “You will find nothing.” I shifted into shadow, certain he’d see me from this
height. To my relief, he resumed his spot without incident.
   Constable
Harkness dispatched all but a single watchman to the ground floor of the
cottage, commanding the enforcers toinspect
every room for Mrs. Arnold. Human olfactory senses did not rival a cat’s or
everyone in the room would have realized the woman lay beyond the brickwork and
not upstairs. The constable posted his remaining man, a fellow he called Johnson,
at the staircase near the street and stayed to converse in topics of which I
had no interest.
   Dust
settled through the cracks, sifting us with debris as the Watchmen pounded
above. Mr. Arnold withdrew and sat on the stairs, his head between his hands. Meanwhile,
Eddy searched for me in the damp, dark corners, calling,“Catters…here,
Catters.” As I expected, he paused at the newly bricked recess and studied the
mortar. He tugged the top of his hair, lost in thought. I settled onto my perch
and tried to influence him from a distance. Eddy did his best thinking under my
gaze.
   Sissy wiped
the sediment from her hair and clothes.“Cattarina!” she said. “Are you here? You
can come out now. It’s quite safe, I assure you.”
   “She
will turn up, Mrs. Poe,” Mr. Fitzgerald assured her. “Cats are rather genius.”
   “Mr. Fitzgerald,”
Sissy said, “what is quicklime used for? Mother useslime to preserve her eggs, but is that different—”
   A
watchman leaned through the kitchen door and said,“We’ve searched the entire house,
what little there is. Mrs. Arnold isn’t here.”
   “Gather
the men and leave for my house,” Constable Harkness said. “Johnson and I will be
along shortly.” He glanced at his pocket watch and buttoned his coat,
indicating a departure.
   The
cobbler jumped to his feet, his ailment forgotten.“Go! That’s it! Go! I told
you I was innocent.” He laughed and danced a little jig.
   The
constable ignored him and approached Sissy and Mr. Fitzgerald.“Sir, you have
my leave. For now,” he said. “But I may have questions for you later.”
   Mr. Fitzgerald
hopped to it. He waved to the Poes as he made for the street.“Goodbye all!
Goodbye!” He slapped Johnson’s shoulder on his way out. “Have a good
afternoon!”
   I stood
and switched my tail. Eddy and Sissy had not solved the wall puzzle in time.
Fiddlesticks. If Constable Harkness left, Mr. Arnold would never pay for his
crimes. I contemplated which head I should pounce upon, Mr. Arnold’s or
Constable Harkness’s. I settled on the constable’s. In the interest of solving
the bigger crime, he would likely reserve punishment for my much smaller one.
Besides which, Mr. Arnold scared me furless.
   “You
can’t,” Sissy said to the constable. She clasped her hands together. “Please.
We haven’t found our cat yet.”
   Eddy
returned to his wife and held her close.“With or without Mr. Arnold’s
blessing, we will stay and look for Cattarina. Do not fret, my dear.”
   I
crouched, calculating my angle.
   “I’m sorry, Mrs. Poe, but I must depart
for home. Matilda is waiting. If you wish, I can leave Johnson,” he said. The
man eyed a large crack in the brickwork near his feet. “I’m surprised the hovel
didn’t collapse during our visit.”
   I
wiggled my rear, preparing for the jump.
   “Hovel?” Mr. Arnold said. “I’ll have you
know, this is a very well-constructed house.” He rapped against the brick wall with
his knuckles.
   “Meeeeoooowwwrrrrrr!”
   Surprised
by the howl—it had not come from me—I almost slipped from the beam.
The room fell silent. The blood drained from Mr. Arnold’s face, turning him
chalky.
   “Meeeeoooowwwrrrrrr!”
Midnight said again. The blow upon the bricks must have stirred him.
   “That
sound, it’s…it’s inhuman,” Eddy said, “and it’s coming from behind the wall! I
knew the masonry looked recent.”
   “Quicklime,”
Sissy said under her breath. “Of course.”
   “Johnson!
Come here!” Constable Harkness clapped his hands. “Tear it down!”
   “No!”
Mr. Arnold protested.
   Yes! Demolish
the wall and reveal the evil deed! I leapt to another joist for a better view.
   Eddy grabbed
the cobbler by the shoulder and held him back while Johnson broke through the
bricks with the watchman’s pole. As the mortar had not set, the structure fell with
ease, revealing the body of Tabitha Arnold. She lay crumpled against the
alcove’s interior and stared back at us with eyes much farther apart than nature
intended. She had her husband to thank for this new look, as he’d split her
skull nearly in half. The axe cleave ran from the top of her pate, along the bridge
of her nose, and down to her chin, parting the hemispheres of her head. Perched
on top of the woman’s corpse was Midnight. Infection had swollen his eye shut,
giving him a rather hellish appearance. His tail bristled,and he spit fire at the
man who’d killed his companion.
    Sissy swooned. Constable Harkness caught
her in time.“Poe,” he said, “you’ve got a murderer in your hands. Hold him
tight.” He helped Sissy to her feet and lent her his arm.
   “It’s
Pluto, b-back from the dead.” Mr. Arnold strained to reach Midnight. “I walled
the monster up within the tomb!” Eddy struggled to keep him still while
Watchman Johnson looked on, dazed by Tabitha Arnold’s bloody corpse.
   “Johnson!
Drop your pole and help Mr. Poe,” the constable said. “Place Mr. Arnold under
arrest.”
   Watchman
Johnson blinked.
   “Never!
I will not go to jail for something I didn’t do!” Mr. Arnold said. He twisted
from Eddy’s grasp and pulled a knife from his pocket—the same pocketknife
I’d seen at his house on Green Street. Before Watchman Johnson or Constable
Harkness could stop him, Mr. Arnold unlocked the blade and dove for Eddy.
   I unlocked
my own and sprang from the joist.
   I did
not believe in hell, but if it existed, Abner and I would go together. I
landed, claws first, and opened his scalp like a mouse belly. He dropped his
knife and tried to swat me from his head, but I persisted. Unable to see with
my back claws digging into his face, he staggered toward Eddy, and Eddy tripped
him. The cobbler stumbled to the floor and stayed there. At last I had felled
my quarry! I jumped to safety, settling near my companion’s feet without so
much as a bent whisker.
   “Don’t
forget, Mr. Arnold,” Eddy said to him. “You can’t trust the Irish. Or their
cats.”
   Mr.
Arnold stared at me, his eyes round and unblinking.“Release me from your
power, you demon!” he shrieked. His eyes flickered with recognition. His memory
had returned. “You are the cat in the fire!” he said to me. “You are the cat
that haunts me! You are the c-cat…” He rolled to his side and drew up his knees.
“It is coming back to me! It’s all coming back! The drink addled my brain. I
have blacked out before, but never…never…” He slapped the flagstone floor in
anger. “No, no, no!”
   “What
is coming back?” Sissy asked.
   “Speak,
man,” Eddy said.
   “I
killed Tabitha! I am the villain!”
   ***
   Eddy
wanted nothing more to do with Abner Arnold or his dreadful cellar. Despite his
wishes to the contrary, Sissy demanded to stay andminister to the sick. This involved feeding Midnight a saucer of
milk and wiping his ruined eye with a damp cloth. She completed these tasks in
the Arnold’s kitchen after giving her husband a kiss on the cheek and a promise
to return homesoonest. At their
parting, I divined that Eddy knew Sissy had secrets, and Sissy knew Eddy had
secrets, and they each resolved to let the other keep them. My intuition aided
more than just the hunt.
   Sissy set
Midnight on the kitchen table and examined him all over.“You poor thing,” she
said to him. “A hot meal and a warm bed are what you need. I know just the home
for you.”
   I supervised
from the floor. The murmured voices of the watchmen floated up from the cellar
through the planks. They’d been with Mrs. Arnold for the duration and would probably
remain with her long after Sissy, Midnight, and I left. As for Mr. Arnold,
Constable Harkness put him in a wagon that I hoped was bound for Eastern State
Penitentiary.
   “Your
mistress is kind,” Midnight said to me. “I like her.”
   “She is
not my mistress,” I said. “That implies inequality. However, we can agree on
her kindness. You will not find a more caring human, besides my Eddy, of
course.”
   Sissy
left us to wash her hands in the basin.
   Midnight
looked at me with his one good eye.“We did it, Cattarina. We avenged Snip.
Though at the cost of a woman’s life.”
   “Your
companion’s life.”
   “Yes.
That pains me. Deeply.” He settled into a kitty loaf and tucked his front paws
under his chest. “Now that I know true companionship, Cattarina, I can’t go
back to Sarah.”
   “Dear
me, that is a problem. I will think on it.” I joined him on the tabletop and
groomed his ears. We purred together, harmony and melody.
   “Mrs. Arnold
may have a salve I can use on your eye,” Sissy said to Midnight. “It can’t hurt
to look.” She began a search of the kitchen cupboards, opening and closing the
drawers to the jingle of flatware. She unfastened the cabinet at eye level to
reveal rows and rows of canning jars filled with brown shavings. “Hello, what’s
this?” She took down a container and unlatched the metal catch, releasing a
spicy sweet smell that filled the room.
   My
tongue paused, mid-lick.
   “Sassafras
bark,” Sissy whispered. “And so much of it.”
   The
odor drifted through my thoughts, a long forgotten ghost that haunted my memory.
I traveled to the edge of the table and studied the jar in her hand. Mrs. Arnold’s
tea, of course. The woman had served so many pots of it to her
husband—watering him as Constable Harkness did Matilda—that the
scent had etched itself into the story, the black cat’s story.











    [Картинка: img_22] 
   Strong
Medicine
   “DOCTOR LEABOURNE,” SISSY
ASKED, “what do you think of Sassafras tea?”
   In the
days following the discovery of Mrs. Arnold’s body, Eddy invited Dr. Leabourne to
Poe House. The physician visited often, and though he could not cure Sissy, his
presence always seemed to give the family hope—in my estimation, the
strongest medicine. Late this afternoon, he and I sat on the edge of Sissy’s
bed, examining our patient, who reclined against her pillows.
   “Sassafras
tea?” he asked. Robust of frame and nature, Dr. Leabourne was the catch of the
litter. I had never seen a more angular jaw, a fuller head of wheat-colored hair.
But he was no Eddy. “Do you mean taken as a tonic?” He took her wrist and
placed his fingers over her veins. I did not know what covering them would do
but noted it anyway.
   “Yes,
do you have any faith in it? I thought it might help my ailment.”
   “Sassafras
is a blood tonic.” He released her wrist and felt her forehead, a more familiar
procedure. “It will do nothing for consumption, I’m afraid.” He withdrew his
touch and reached for his black bag. “If you like the taste, you may have it as
a refresher. But I caution you. It has poisonous effects.”
   Sissy
sat forward.“Poisonous? How so?”
   “It’s
very damaging to the organs, especially if they’re weak to start. If taken for
too long a period, it causes sweating, nausea, even hallucination.”
   “Can it
kill a person?”
   Dr.
Leabourne snapped his bag closed.“In large doses? Most certainly.” He rose
from the bed. “You are as well as can be expected, considering the fright you
had. Get plenty of good food, plenty of fresh air, and stay—”
   “I
know, stay home and rest.” She flopped back against the pillows. “That may comfort
the body, but it positively shrivels the mind.”
   “Feel
better, Mrs. Poe. Feel better.” Then he left, as he usually did, to speak Muddy
and Eddy in the parlor and give them hisdiagnosis.
In truth, I had already made my assessment. But I much preferred the doctor’s optimism.
   Sissy
pulled me onto her lap.“Cattarina? Did you hear the doctor? He said sassafras
causes hallucinations. Even death.”
   Death. Her glee did not match
the topic. Perhaps the doctor had left too soon.
   “Do you
know what this means? Tabitha Arnold didn’t want to fell the sassafras tree. She
wanted its bark for tea. Don’t you see?” She held me up and looked into my
eyes. “Mrs. Arnold wanted to kill Mr. Arnold, and who could blame her? The
debt, the drinking, the violence. Liquor had already weakened his liver, and
the sassafras doomed it.” Her eyes twinkled. “This must have caused the delusions that led to his murderous
actions, not the trips to the tavern. Oh, I am so astute!” She hugged me tight.
“We make a grand team, don’t we, girl?”
   When I
wiggled, she released me and left the bed to tidy her hair in the mirror over
the dresser.“I give this secret to you and you alone, Cattarina. We must
never,ever tell Eddy that any means
other than the bottle moved Mr. Arnold to violence.” She slid another pin into
her bun. “I have my reasons. And besides, it won’t make a bit of difference to
Mr. Arnold since he will live out the remainder of his days in an asylum. And I
do mean days.” She finished by giving the back of her head a partial look in
the glass.
   We
arrived downstairs to find Dr. Leabourne at the door. Eddy tried to press a few
coins into his hand, but the good doctor refused and took a handshake instead. Once
we were alone, Muddy revived us with a suggestion.“Who would like an early supper?
If you don’t expect fixins, you can have it now.”
   Supper? Yes, I would take
piece of chicken skin, dear Muddy. I’d already smelled it from upstairs.
   “For
once, I have an appetite,” Sissy said. “Let’s eat.”
   “That
is no wonder,” Eddy said, guiding his wife by the small of her back. “Dr.
Leabourne says you are in good health.” He ushered her into the kitchen, along
with the rest of us, and sat her at the table. “And to celebrate, I’d like to present
my story, ‘The Black Cat.’”
   “You
finished it?” Sissy asked.
   “I will
leave that to your conclusion, wife.” He produced a scroll from inside his coat.
“You broke my heart after the first draft. See if this one is to your liking.”
He handed the curled page to her.
   The
story had taken but an instant to finish after the horror in the Arnolds’
cellar. That very night, once Sissy and Muddy had been put to bed, he and I
worked at shaping the letters, staying up until dawn to finish them. My crime
solving had yet again inspired him to write. As his muse, this thrilled me
since I had begun to feel my importance slipping as of late, at least with
regard to his work. The document stayed on his desk another day while he
considered it. I likened it to a pie on a windowsill. He must have thought it
cool enough to bring down this morning.
   Muddy stoked
the cook stove with a piece of kindling.“Read the story aloud, Virginia.”
   Once Eddy
took his seat, Sissy unrolled the paper, her fingers shaking, and recited his
words:“‘One night as I sat, half stupefied, in a den of more than infamy, my
attention was suddenly drawn to some black object, reposing upon the head of
one of the immense hogsheads of Gin, or of Rum, which constituted the chief
furniture of the apartment. I had been looking steadily at the top of this hogshead for some minutes, and what
now caused me surprise was the fact that I had not sooner perceived the object
thereupon. I approached it, and touched it with my hand. It was a black cat—a
very large one—fully as large as Pluto,
and closely resembling him in every respect but one. Pluto had not a white hair upon any portion of his body; but this
cat had a large, although indefinite splotch of white, covering nearly the
whole region of the breast.’”
   Muddy floured
and fried the chicken while her daughter read, nodding at parts of the story. When
the old woman turned her back, Eddy took down a tin of jerky from the pantry
and fed me a piece. And then another. I came back again, but he waved me away. So
I settled next to his feet and contented myself with the sound of Sissy’s voice.
I realized now that Eddy could not live without either one of us. To thrive, a
writer must have a muse to bring the story and an audience to appreciate it.
Sissy and I were not exactly a team. But to quote Ariscatle, “Our whole was
greater than the sum of our parts.” Constable Harkness would have to agree.
We’d helped him, too.
   “Oh, Eddy,”
Sissy said at the end, “this is a marvelous eulogy.” She handed the scroll back
to him, and he replaced it in his jacket.
   “So you
like it?” Eddy asked.
   “How
could I not?” she said.
   “I
liked it, too,” Muddy said. “Even if it parts from the truth here and there.”
   “Some
of the circumstances have been changed to protect the innocent,” he said. He
reached down and patted the top of my head.
   “Mother?
Can you give us a minute?” Sissy asked. “I need to talk to Eddy, alone.”
   “Watch
the stove,” Muddy said before leaving. “I don’t want it to get too hot.”
   After a
quiet period, Sissy spoke.“Your writing had more depth than usual.”
   “It
did?” Eddy’s shoes shifted beneath the table. The elation in his voice
heartened me. “I simply paid the black cat the kindness he deserved—”
   “That’s
not what I meant,” she said. “Mother may not have heard it between the lines,
but I did. How the main character’s drunkenness led to the ruination of his
sanity? And took away his wife?”
   Eddy
did not answer.
   “I will
always be with you, Edgar, in life and in death. Do not fear. But our kingdom by
the sea needs a strong ruler. Will you try again? For me?”
   “Yes,
Virginia, of course.”
   A light
scratch at the kitchen door stirred me. I hopped on the sideboard and peeked
through the window. Midnight sat at the backdoor, waiting for it to open. I
looked to Eddy and Sissy, still in the midst of their talk. Though from her
smile, it had turned to lighter subjects.
   “I’ve
been wanting to tell you for weeks, Sissy, but we’ve been so busy,” Eddy said.
“I heard from William again about the collection.The Prose Romances of Edgar Allan Poe will soon be for sale. I am the
luckiest man alive!”
   When
they embraced, I jumped down to visit with my pal, causing the tom to leap with
fright.“I only meant to startle you, not set your heart afire,” I said to him.
   “It’s just
been a few days since my Tabitha’s death, and my nerves are still mending,” he
said. He stared back at me with both eyes. “My infection is mending, too. Mr.
Eakins applies a cream every morning and every evening. But I can open the lid
now.”
   “Cats
are his business, you know.” I sat near the nail head that once vexed Eddy.
Muddy had knocked it flat with a rock and a curse in recent days. “Do you mean
to stay with the old man?”
   “That’s
one of the reasons for my visit.”
   “We are
the others!” Silas said, skirting the corner with his brother. His fur shook as
he trotted. “Greetings, Cattarina! We found a new escape hole in the cellar!”
   “You
are looking well,” Samuel said to me.
   “I am
resplendent with victory,” I said. “I trust you heard our haunt was
successful?”
   “All of
Spring Garden has heard!” Silas said.
   “Join
us?” Midnight asked.
   Eddy
and Sissy would not miss me if I returned by moonrise. I followed the toms to the
now-familiar courtyard on Franklin. Near the base of the sassafras tree, George
and Margaret waited next to a coiled snake of sausage links.“Hello,
Cattarina!” they said in unison.
   “How
marvelous!” I said. “Where did the meat come from?”
   “You
may be the Huntress of Spring Garden,” Midnight said, “but I am the Thief of
Rittenhouse.”
   And so
he was. He would steal part of my heart this night, the part I considered feral
and free and utterly feline, and he would never return it. We tore apart the
links and ate them by the tree that started it all, honoring Snip with our
camaraderie. Mr. Fitzgerald’s shop was closed this time of day, and Mr.
Arnold’s shop stood vacant and boarded. Aside from the lamplighter working his
way along Franklin, we had our privacy.
   When
we’d finished our repast, my pals offered their goodbyes, along with assurances
of future meetings. While our friendship had just begun, I could not say the
same of Midnight. He and I stayed behind, nestled among the roots of the tree.
“Thank you for the gift,” I said to him.
   “The
sausage? It was nothing.”
   “No,
the gift of memory. I love this tree, and I will be glad to think of pleasanter
things when I pass it. There are so few scaling trees left in this part of
Philadelphia. It’s all in the bark, you know. If it’s too smooth—”
   “Cattarina,
I’m leaving.”
   Twilight
settled into the courtyard, blending with the tree’s shadow until they became
one. “Yes, I know,” I said at last. “When Sissy took you to Mr. Eakins’s house,
I predicted the outcome. Will you be very far away?”
   “I will
be with a family on a wagon. From the way it’s packed, I think they mean to
travel a great distance. They need a mouser for the journey, you see. I put
that much together. Though I still don’t know what aMissouri is.”
   “Mizzzzouri. The word that tickles my
tongue,” I said. “Are you pleased with your family?”
   He
stood and arched his back, giving it a stretch, then walked into the open.“Very pleased. My new companions are a young man about Sissy’s age and his
wife—Ben and Aggie.”
   “Any
children?” I followed him and brushed along his side.
   “No.
But I expect that will change. By then, I will be king mouser and will have
earned a good place in their home.” His pupils grew very large. “Think of it,
Cattarina, I will have a job. A purpose.”
   “All
cats should be so fortunate,” I said.
   “Come
with me?” When I did not answer, he licked my cheek. “Then I’ll visit you one
day.”
   “Or I
will find you.”
   We were
both terrible liars.
   Once he
left, I climbed the tree and watched the black cat,my black cat, vanish between the darkened buildings of Green Street.
I would miss him, but I could not leave Eddy, for my companion held the other
part of my heart, the part that was constant and pure and completely devoted. From
here, Poe House was no bigger than Sissy’s red trinket box, so fragile and
small. Oh, how I longed to protect that little dwelling and keep its occupants safe
and merry, if not for all time, then for as long as possible.
   And I
did until fall, the season of the raven.

   Dear Friend:
   Soon
after our adventure, the newspaper printed the black cat’seulogy. I surmised as much from the stack of copies Eddy brought
home and from the fuss he made over one particular page. Nothing escapes this
cat of letters. Speaking of me, and I amalways
speaking of me, I considered the papers splendid napping material.
   In the
meantime, we do hope you purchase one of Eddy’s works. Winter is coming, and we
are in need of mutton.
   And
chicken feathers.
    [Картинка: img_23] 
   Yours
truly,
   Cattarina
Poe






   “The Black Cat”
   by Edgar Allan Poe
   Originally published in theUnited States Saturday Post, August 19, 1843
   FOR THE MOST WILD, yet most homely narrative
which I am about to pen, I neither expect nor solicit belief. Mad indeed would
I be to expect it, in a case where my very senses reject their own evidence.
Yet, mad am I not -- and very surely do I not dream. But tomorrow I die, and
to-day I would unburthen my soul. My immediate purpose is to place before the
world, plainly, succinctly, and without comment, a series of mere household
events. In their consequences, these events have terrified -- have tortured --
have destroyed me. Yet I will not attempt to expound them. To me, they have
presented little but Horror -- to many they will seem less terrible than
barroques. Hereafter, perhaps, some intellect may be found which will reduce my
phantasm to the common-place --
some intellect more calm, more logical, and far less excitable than my own,
which will perceive, in the circumstances I detail with awe, nothing more than
an ordinary succession of very natural causes and effects.
   From my infancy I was
noted for the docility and humanity of my disposition. My tenderness of heart
was even so conspicuous as to make me the jest of my companions. I was
especially fond of animals, and was indulged by my parents with a great variety
of pets. With these I spent most of my time, and never was so happy as when
feeding and caressing them. This peculiarity of character grew with my growth,
and, in my manhood, I derived from it one of my principal sources of pleasure.
To those who have cherished an affection for a faithful and sagacious dog, I need hardly be at the
trouble of explaining the nature or the intensity of the gratification thus
derivable. There is something in the unselfish and self-sacrificing love of a
brute, which goes directly to the heart of him who has had frequent occasion to
test the paltry friendship and gossamer
fidelity of mere Man.
   I married early, and was
happy to find in my wife a disposition not uncongenial with my own. Observing
my partiality for domestic pets, she lost no opportunity of procuring those of
the most agreeable kind. We had birds, gold-fish, a fine dog, rabbits, a small
monkey, and a cat.
   This latter was a
remarkably large and beautiful animal, entirely black, and sagacious to an astonishing degree. In
speaking of his intelligence, my wife, who at heart was not a little tinctured with superstition, made
frequent allusion to the ancient popular notion, which regarded all black cats
as witches in disguise. Not that she was everserious upon this point --
and I mention the matter at all for no better reason than that it happens, just
now, to be remembered.
   Pluto -- this was the cat's name -- was my favorite pet and
playmate. I alone fed him, and he attended me wherever I went about the house.
It was even with difficulty that I could prevent him from following me through
the streets.
   Our friendship lasted,
in this manner, for several years, during which my general temperament and
character -- through the instrumentality of the Fiend Intemperance -- had (I blush to confess it) experienced a radical
alteration for the worse. I grew, day by day, more moody, more irritable, more
regardless of the feelings of others. I suffered myself to use intemperate
language to my wife. At length, I even offered her personal violence. My pets,
of course, were made to feel the change in my disposition. I not only
neglected, but illused them. For Pluto,
however, I still retained sufficient regard to restrain me from maltreating
him, as I made no scruple of maltreating the rabbits, the monkey, or even the
dog, when by accident, or through affection, they came in my way. But my
disease grew upon me -- for what disease is like Alcohol ! -- and at length
even Pluto, who was now becoming
old, and consequently somewhat peevish -- even Pluto began to experience the effects of my ill temper.
   One night, returning
home, much intoxicated, from one of my haunts about town, I fancied that the
cat avoided my presence. I seized him; when, in his fright at my violence, he
inflicted a slight wound upon my hand with his teeth. The fury of a demon
instantly possessed me. I knew myself no longer. My original soul seemed, at
once, to take its flight from my body; and a more than fiendish malevolence,
gin-nurtured, thrilled every fibre of my frame. I took from my waistcoat-pocket a penknife, opened
it, grasped the poor beast by the throat, and deliberately cut one of its eyes
from the socket ! I blush, I burn, I shudder, while I pen the damnable
atrocity.
   When reason returned
with the morning -- when I had slept off the fumes of the night's debauch -- I
experienced a sentiment half of horror, half of remorse, for the crime of which
I had been guilty; but it was, at best, a feeble and equivocal feeling, and the soul remained untouched. I again
plunged into excess, and soon drowned in wine all memory of the deed.
   In the meantime the cat
slowly recovered. The socket of the lost eye presented, it is true, a frightful
appearance, but he no longer appeared to suffer any pain. He went about the
house as usual, but, as might be expected, fled in extreme terror at my
approach. I had so much of my old heart left, as to be at first grieved by this
evident dislike on the part of a creature which had once so loved me. But this
feeling soon gave place to irritation. And then came, as if to my final and
irrevocable overthrow, the spirit of PERVERSENESS. Of this spirit philosophy
takes no account. Yet I am not more sure that my soul lives, than I am that
perverseness is one of the primitive impulses of the human heart -- one of the
indivisible primary faculties, or sentiments, which give direction to the
character of Man. Who has not, a hundred times, found himself committing a vile
or a silly action, for no other reason than because he knows he shouldnot?
Have we not a perpetual inclination, in the teeth of our best judgment, to
violate that which is Law, merely because we understand it to be such? This
spirit of perverseness, I say, came to my final overthrow. It was this
unfathomable longing of the soul to vex itself -- to offer violence to its own
nature -- to do wrong for the wrong's sake only -- that urged me to continue
and finally to consummate the injury I had inflicted upon the unoffending
brute. One morning, in cool blood, I slipped a noose about its neck and hung it
to the limb of a tree; -- hung it with the tears streaming from my eyes, and
with the bitterest remorse at my heart; -- hung itbecause I knew that
it had loved me, and because I felt it had given me no reason of offence; --
hung itbecause I knew that in so doing I was committing a sin -- a
deadly sin that would so jeopardize my immortal soul as to place it -- if such
a thing were possible -- even beyond the reach of the infinite mercy of the
Most Merciful and Most Terrible God.
   On the night of the day
on which this cruel deed was done, I was aroused from sleep by the cry of fire.
The curtains of my bed were in flames. The whole house was blazing. It was with
great difficulty that my wife, a servant, and myself, made our escape from the conflagration. The destruction was
complete. My entire worldly wealth was swallowed up, and I resigned myself
thenceforward to despair.
   I am above the weakness
of seeking to establish a sequence of cause and effect, between the disaster
and the atrocity. But I am detailing a chain of facts -- and wish not to leave
even a possible link imperfect. On the day succeeding the fire, I visited the
ruins. The walls, with one exception, had fallen in. This exception was found
in a compartment wall, not very thick, which stood about the middle of the
house, and against which had rested the head of my bed. The plastering had
here, in great measure, resisted the action of the fire -- a fact which I
attributed to its having been recently spread. About this wall a dense crowd
were collected, and many persons seemed to be examining a particular portion of
it with very minute and eager attention. The words "strange!"
"singular!" and other similar expressions, excited my curiosity. I
approached and saw, as if graven inbas relief upon the white surface,
the figure of a giganticcat. The impression was given with an accuracy
truly marvellous. There was a rope about the animal's neck.
   When I first beheld this
apparition -- for I could scarcely regard it as less -- my wonder and my terror
were extreme. But at length reflection came to my aid. The cat, I remembered,
had been hung in a garden adjacent to the house. Upon the alarm of fire, this
garden had been immediately filled by the crowd -- by some one of whom the
animal must have been cut from the tree and thrown, through an open window,
into my chamber. This had probably been done with the view of arousing me from
sleep. The falling of other walls had compressed the victim of my cruelty into
the substance of the freshly-spread plaster; the lime of which, with the
flames, and the ammonia from the carcass, had then accomplished the portraiture
as I saw it.
   Although I thus readily
accounted to my reason, if not altogether to my conscience, for the startling
fact just detailed, it did not the less fail to make a deep impression upon my
fancy. For months I could not rid myself of the phantasm of the cat; and, during this period, there came back into
my spirit a half-sentiment that seemed, but was not, remorse. I went so far as
to regret the loss of the animal, and to look about me, among the vile haunts
which I now habitually frequented, for another pet of the same species, and of
somewhat similar appearance, with which to supply its place.
   One night as I sat, half
stupified, in a den of more than infamy, my attention was suddenly drawn to
some black object, reposing upon the head of one of the immense hogsheads of
Gin, or of Rum, which constituted the chief furniture of the apartment. I had
been looking steadily at the top of this hogshead for some minutes, and what now caused me surprise was the
fact that I had not sooner perceived the object thereupon. I approached it, and
touched it with my hand. It was a black cat -- a very large one -- fully as
large as Pluto, and closely
resembling him in every respect but one. Pluto had not a white hair upon any portion of his body; but this
cat had a large, although indefinite splotch of white, covering nearly the
whole region of the breast.
   Upon my touching him, he
immediately arose, purred loudly, rubbed against my hand, and appeared
delighted with my notice. This, then, was the very creature of which I was in
search. I at once offered to purchase it of the landlord; but this person made
no claim to it -- knew nothing of it -- had never seen it before.
   I continued my caresses,
and, when I prepared to go home, the animal evinced a disposition to accompany me. I permitted it to do so;
occasionally stooping and patting it as I proceeded. When it reached the house
it domesticated itself at once, and became immediately a great favorite with my
wife.
    For my own part, I soon found a dislike
to it arising within me. This was just the reverse of what I had anticipated;
but -- I know not how or why it was -- its evident fondness for myself rather
disgusted and annoyed. By slow degrees, these feelings of disgust and annoyance
rose into the bitterness of hatred. I avoided the creature; a certain sense of
shame, and the remembrance of my former deed of cruelty, preventing me from
physically abusing it. I did not, for some weeks, strike, or otherwise
violently ill use it; but gradually -- very gradually -- I came to look upon it
with unutterable loathing, and to flee silently from its odious presence, as
from the breath of a pestilence.
   What added, no doubt, to
my hatred of the beast, was the discovery, on the morning after I brought it
home, that, like Pluto, it also
had been deprived of one of its eyes. This circumstance, however, only endeared
it to my wife, who, as I have already said, possessed, in a high degree, that
humanity of feeling which had once been my distinguishing trait, and the source
of many of my simplest and purest pleasures.
   With my aversion to this
cat, however, its partiality for myself seemed to increase. It followed my
footsteps with a pertinacity
which it would be difficult to make the reader comprehend. Whenever I sat, it
would crouch beneath my chair, or spring upon my knees, covering me with its
loathsome caresses. If I arose to walk it would get between my feet and thus
nearly throw me down, or, fastening its long and sharp claws in my dress,
clamber, in this manner, to my breast. At such times, although I longed to destroy
it with a blow, I was yet withheld from so doing, partly by a memory of my
former crime, but chiefly -- let me confess it at once -- by absolutedread
of the beast.
   This dread was not
exactly a dread of physical evil -- and yet I should be at a loss how otherwise
to define it. I am almost ashamed to own -- yes, even in this felon's cell, I
am almost ashamed to own -- that the terror and horror with which the animal
inspired me, had been heightened by one of the merest chimæras it would be
possible to conceive. My wife had called my attention, more than once, to the
character of the mark of white hair, of which I have spoken, and which
constituted the sole visible difference between the strange beast and the one I
had destroyed. The reader will remember that this mark, although large, had
been originally very indefinite; but, by slow degrees -- degrees nearly
imperceptible, and which for a long time my Reason struggled to reject as
fanciful -- it had, at length, assumed a rigorous distinctness of outline. It
was now the representation of an object that I shudder to name -- and for this,
above all, I loathed, and dreaded, and would have rid myself of the monster had
I dared -- it was now, I say, the image of a hideous -- of a ghastly thing --
of the GALLOWS! -- oh, mournful and terrible engine of Horror and of Crime --
of Agony and of Death!
   And now was I indeed
wretched beyond the wretchedness of mere Humanity. Anda brute beast --
whose fellow I had contemptuously destroyed --a brute beast to work out
for me -- for me a man, fashioned in the image of the High God -- so much of
insufferable wo! Alas! neither by day nor by night knew I the blessing of Rest
any more! During the former the creature left me no moment alone; and, in the
latter, I started, hourly, from dreams of unutterable fear, to find the hot
breath of the thing upon my face, and its vast weight -- an incarnate
Night-Mare that I had no power to shake off -- incumbent eternally upon my
heart!
   Beneath the pressure of
torments such as these, the feeble remnant of the good within me succumbed.
Evil thoughts became my sole intimates -- the darkest and most evil of
thoughts. The moodiness of my usual temper increased to hatred of all things
and of all mankind; while, from the sudden, frequent, and ungovernable
outbursts of a fury to which I now blindly abandoned myself, my uncomplaining
wife, alas! was the most usual and the most patient of sufferers.
   One day she accompanied
me, upon some household errand, into the cellar of the old building which our
poverty compelled us to inhabit. The cat followed me down the steep stairs,
and, nearly throwing me headlong, exasperated me to madness. Uplifting an axe,
and forgetting, in my wrath, the childish dread which had hitherto stayed my
hand, I aimed a blow at the animal which, of course, would have proved
instantly fatal had it descended as I wished. But this blow was arrested by the
hand of my wife. Goaded, by the interference, into a rage more than demoniacal,
I withdrew my arm from her grasp and buried the axe in her brain. She fell dead
upon the spot, without a groan.
   This hideous murder
accomplished, I set myself forthwith, and with entire deliberation, to the task
of concealing the body. I knew that I could not remove it from the house,
either by day or by night, without the risk of being observed by the neighbors.
Many projects entered my mind. At one period I thought of cutting the corpse
into minute fragments, and destroying them by fire. At another, I resolved to
dig a grave for it in the floor of the cellar. Again, I deliberated about
casting it in the well in the yard -- about packing it in a box, as if
merchandize, with the usual arrangements, and so getting a porter to take it
from the house. Finally I hit upon what I considered a far better expedient than either of these. I
determined to wall it up in the cellar -- as the monks of the middle ages are
recorded to have walled up their victims.
   For a purpose such as
this the cellar was well adapted. Its walls were loosely constructed, and had
lately been plastered throughout with a rough plaster, which the dampness of
the atmosphere had prevented from hardening. Moreover, in one of the walls was
a projection, caused by a false chimney, or fireplace, that had been filled up,
and made to resemble the rest of the cellar. I made no doubt that I could
readily displace the bricks at this point, insert the corpse, and wall the
whole up as before, so that no eye could detect any thing suspicious.
   And in this calculation
I was not deceived. By means of a crow-bar I easily dislodged the bricks, and,
having carefully deposited the body against the inner wall, I propped it in
that position, while, with little trouble, I re-laid the whole structure as it
originally stood. Having procured mortar, sand, and hair, with every possible
precaution, I prepared a plaster which could not be distinguished from the old,
and with this I very carefully went over the new brickwork. When I had
finished, I felt satisfied that all was right. The wall did not present the
slightest appearance of having been disturbed. The rubbish on the floor was picked
up with the minutest care. I looked around triumphantly, and said to myself --
"Here at least, then, my labor has not been in vain."
   My next step was to look
for the beast which had been the cause of so much wretchedness; for I had, at
length, firmly resolved to put it to death. Had I been able to meet with it, at
the moment, there could have been no doubt of its fate; but it appeared that
the crafty animal had been alarmed at the violence of my previous anger, and
forebore to present itself in my present mood. It is impossible to describe, or
to imagine, the deep, the blissful sense of relief which the absence of the
detested creature occasioned in my bosom. It did not make its appearance during
the night -- and thus for one night at least, since its introduction into the
house, I soundly and tranquilly slept; aye, slept even with the burden of
murder upon my soul!
   The second and the third
day passed, and still my tormentor came not. Once again I breathed as a
freeman. The monster, in terror, had fled the premises forever! I should behold
it no more! My happiness was supreme! The guilt of my dark deed disturbed me
but little. Some few inquiries had been made, but these had been readily
answered. Even a search had been instituted -- but of course nothing was to be
discovered. I looked upon my future felicity
as secured.
   Upon the fourth day of
the assassination, a party of the police came, very unexpectedly, into the
house, and proceeded again to make rigorous investigation of the premises.
Secure, however, in the inscrutability of my place of concealment, I felt no
embarrassment whatever. The officers bade me accompany them in their search.
They left no nook or corner unexplored. At length, for the third or fourth
time, they descended into the cellar. I quivered not in a muscle. My heart beat
calmly as that of one who slumbers in innocence. I walked the cellar from end
to end. I folded my arms upon my bosom, and roamed easily to and fro. The
police were thoroughly satisfied and prepared to depart. The glee at my heart
was too strong to be restrained. I burned to say if but one word, by way of
triumph, and to render doubly sure their assurance of my guiltlessness.
   "Gentlemen," I
said at last, as the party ascended the steps, "I delight to have allayed
your suspicions. I wish you all health, and a little more courtesy. By the bye,
gentlemen, this -- this is a very well constructed house." (In the rabid
desire to say something easily, I scarcely knew what I uttered at all.) --
"I may say anexcellently well constructed house. These walls --
are you going, gentlemen? -- these walls are solidly put together;" and
here, through the mere phrenzy of bravado, I rapped heavily, with a cane which
I held in my hand, upon that very portion of the brickwork behind which stood
the corpse of the wife of my bosom.
   But may God shield and
deliver me from the fangs of the Arch-Fiend ! No sooner had the reverberation
of my blows sunk into silence, than I was answered by a voice from within the
tomb! -- by a cry, at first muffled and broken, like the sobbing of a child,
and then quickly swelling into one long, loud, and continuous scream, utterly anomalous and inhuman -- a howl -- a
wailing shriek, half of horror and half of triumph, such as might have arisen
only out of hell, conjointly from the throats of the dammed in their agony and
of the demons that exult in the damnation.
   Of my own thoughts it is
folly to speak. Swooning, I staggered to the opposite wall. For one instant the
party upon the stairs remained motionless, through extremity of terror and of
awe. In the next, a dozen stout arms were toiling at the wall. It fell bodily.
The corpse, already greatly decayed and clotted with gore, stood erect before
the eyes of the spectators. Upon its head, with red extended mouth and solitary
eye of fire, sat the hideous beast whose craft had seduced me into murder, and
whose informing voice had consigned me to the hangman. I had walled the monster
up within the tomb!



   Reviews
are vital to an author’s success.
   If you
liked this book, please consider leaving a review onAmazon.
   If
you’d like to know whenThe Raven of
Liberty (Cattarina Mystery #3) is coming out and get inside information on ARCs,
promotions, and more, please join Ms. Shaughnessy's mailing list. The author
will never sell your address, and you can unsubscribe at any time.
   Subscribe
   To
learn about the author, please visit her on the web:
   http://www.monicashaughnessy.com
   twitter
   Wordpress
   Copyright© 2014 by Monica Shaughnessy
   All
rights reserved.
   Published
in the United States byJumping
Jackalope Press
   Shaughnessy,
Monica
   The
Black Cats / Monica Shaughnessy
   eISBN: 978-0-9885629-8-1
   Jacket
Design: Monica Shaughnessy
   Edited
by Red Adept


   Excerpt from The Tell-Tail
Heart, Cattarina Mystery #1
   ------------------------------------------
   Chapter
1
   An
Object of Fascination
   EDDY
WAS NEVER HAPPIER than when he was writing, and I was never happier than when Eddy
was happy. That's what concerned me about our trip to Shakey House Tavern
tonight. An official letter had arrived days ago, causing him to abandon his
writing in a fit of melancholy—a worrisome event for this feline muse.
Oh, what power correspondence wields over the Poe household! Since that time,
his quill pen had lain lifeless upon his desk, a casualty of the gloom. But refreshment
only intensified these frequent and unpredictable storms—hence my
concern. Irritated by his lack of attention, I sat beneath the bar and waited
for him to stir. He'd been studying a newspaper in the glow of a lard-oil lamp
for most of the evening, ignoring the boisterous drinkers around him. When he
crinkled the sheets, I leapt onto the polished ledge to investigate, curling my
tail around me. I loved the marks humans made upon the page. They reminded me
of black ants on the march. They also reminded me that until I found a way to
help Eddy, it would be ages before he'd make more of his own.
   "A
pity you don't read, Cattarina," he said to me in confidence. "Murder
has come to Philadelphia again, and it's deliciously disturbing." He
tapped a drawing he'd been examining, a horrible likeness of an elderly woman,
one eye gouged out, the other rolled back in fear, mouth agape. "Far from
the City of Brotherly Love, eh, Catters?"
   I trilled
at my secret name. Everyone else called me Cattarina, including Josef, Shakey
House's stocky barkeep. He'd taken note of me on the bar and approached with
bared teeth, an odd greeting I'd grown accustomed to over the years. When one
lives with humans, one must accommodate such eccentricities.
   "Guten Abend, Cattarina," Josef said
to me. His side-whiskers had grown longer since our last visit. They suited his
broad face. He reached across the bar and stroked my back with a raw, red hand,
sending fur into the smoke circling overhead.
   I lay
down on Eddy's paper and tucked my feet beneath me, settling in for a good pet.
Josef was on the list of people I allowed to touch me. Eddy, of course, held
the first spot, followed by Sissy, then Muddy, then Mr. Coffin, and so on and
so forth, until we arrived at lucky number ten, Josef Wertmüller. Others had
tried; others had bled.
   "Tortoiseshell
cats are good luck. Yes, Mister Poe?" the barkeep continued.
   "I
believe they are," Eddy said without looking up. He turned the page and
folded it in half so he wouldn't disturb me.
   "Such
pretty eyes." Josef scratched the ruff of my neck. "Like two gold
coins. And fur the color of coffee and tea. I take her for barter any day."
   "Would
you have me wander the streets alone, sir? Without my fair Cattarina?" Eddy
asked, straightening. "Without my muse?"
   "Nein," Josef said, withdrawing his
hand, "I would never dream." He took Eddy's empty glass and wiped the
water ring with a rag. "Another mint julep. Yes, Mr. Poe?"
   At this
suggestion, Eddy turned and faced the tavern full of drinkers. A conspiracy of
ravens in black coats and hats, the men squawked, pausing to wet their beaks
between caws. Eddy called out to them, shouting over their conversation. "Attention!
The first to buy me a mint julep may have this newspaper." The bar patrons
ignored him. He tried again. "I say, attention! The first to buy—"
   "We
heard you the first time, Poe," said Hiram Abbott. He sat by himself at
his usual table by the door. His cravat had collected more stains since our
last visit, some of which matched the color of his teeth. Once the chortling
died down, he challenged Eddy. "A newspaper for a drink? I'd hardly call
that a fair trade."
    "Perhaps for a man who can't read,"
Eddy said.
   Laughter
coursed through the room, ripening the apples of Mr. Abbott's cheeks. I longed
to understand Eddy the way other humans did, but alas, could not. While I
possessed a large vocabulary—agrandiose
vocabulary in catterly circles—I owned neither the tongue nor the ear to
communicate with my friend as I would've liked. Yes, I knew the meaning of
oft-repeated words: refreshment, writing, check-in-the-mail, damned story,
illness, murder, madness, and so forth. But a dizzying number remained beyond
reach, causing me to rely on nuance and posture to fill gaps in
understanding—like now. Whatever he'd said to Mr. Abbot pricked the man
like a cocklebur to the paw.
   Eddy
continued, "My news is fresh, gentlemen, purchased from the corner not
more than an hour ago. The ink was still wet when I bought it."
   "You
tell a good tale, Poe," said Mr. Murray, a Shakey House regular with a
long, drooping mustache, "but I've already learned the day's gossip from
Silas and Albert." He jabbed his tablemates with his elbows, spilling
their ale.
   "I
see. Then you and your quilting bee are aware of the latest murder."
   Murder set the ravens
squawking again. Josef, however, remained silent. He wrung the bar towel
between his hands, blanching his knuckles.
   "Speak,
Poe!" said Mr. Murray. "You have our attention."
   A
chorus rose from the crowd. "Speak! Speak!" Mr. Abbott sank lower in
his seat.
   Eddy
shooed me from my makeshift bed, folded the sheets, and waved them above his
head. "The Glass Eye Killer has struck again. TheGazette tells all, in gory detail." His mustache twitched. "And
for those of strong stomach…pictures on page twelve."
   The portly
man who'd kept his shoulder to us most of the evening lunged for the paper,
knocking Eddy with his elbow by accident. I returned with a low-pitched growl.
The man stepped back, hands raised in surrender, and asked Eddy to "call
off the she-devil."
   "I
will if we can settle this like gentlemen," my friend said.
   The man
tossed coins on the bar, prompting Josef to deliver a julep and Eddy to calm me
with a pat to the head. But I had more mischief in mind. I sprang for the
glass, thinking to knock it sideways and end our evening early. Muddy would be
expecting us for dinner; she worried so when we caroused. But Eddy's reflexes
were still keen enough to prevent the "accident." Disappointed, I
hopped to the floor in search of my own refreshment.
   Weaving
through the forest of legs, I sniffed for a crust of bread, a cheese rind,
anything to take the edge off my hunger. If I didn't find something soon, I'd
sneak next door to the bakery for a pat of butter before they closed. I could
always count on the owner for a scrap or two. Above me, the room returned to
its usual cacophony.
   "Read!
Read!" a man in the back shouted. "Don't keep us waiting!"
   Once
the tavern settled, the gentleman who'd received Eddy's paper spoke with
solemnity. "The Glass Eye Killer has claimed a second victim and a second
trophy, striking terror in the hearts of Philadelphians." He paused,
continuing with a strained voice. "This afternoon, fifty-two-year-old Eudora
Tottham, wife of the Honorable Judge Tottham, was found dead two blocks north
of Logan Square. Her throat had been cut, and her eye had been stripped of its prosthesis—a
glass orb of excellent quality."
   "Mein Gott!" Josef said.
"Another!" He left his station at the bar and began wiping tables,
all the while muttering about "Caroline." I didn't know what aCaroline was, but it troubled him.
   The reader
continued, "Mrs. Beckworth T. Jones discovered the body behind Walsey's Dry
Goods, at Wood and Nineteenth, when she took a shortcut home. Why the murderer
is amassing a collection of eyes remains a mystery to Constable Harkness. The
case is further hindered by lack of witnesses. Until this madman is caught, all
persons with prostheses are urged to take special precaution."
   I
jumped from Hiram Abbott's path as he neared, his strides long and brisk.
"Let me see the picture," he said to the portly gentleman. "I
want to see the picture on page twelve. Imust."
   "I
paid for it, sir. Kindly wait your turn."
   "Do
you know who I am?" Mr. Abbott asked. "I am Hiram Abbott, and I own
acres and acres of farmland around these parts."
   The
portly man faced him, their round bellies almost touching. "Do you know
whoI am? Do you know how many coal
minesI own?" he replied.
   I
yawned. I didn't know either one of them, not really. They jostled over the
newspaper, bumping another drinker and pullinghim into the argument. Three pair of shoes danced beneath the bar:
dirty working boots, dull patent slip-ons, and shabby evening shoes with a
tattered sole. Fiddlesticks. All this over ink and paper. Eddy turned and
sipped his drink in peace, ignoring the row.
   "Watch
it, you clumsy simpleton!" Mr. Abbott yelled.
   I
wiggled my whiskers and held back an impending sneeze. The men had stirred the
dust on the floor, aggravating my allergies.
   "Git
back to your table, Abbott, or eat my fist!" the man in boots said. Then
he struck the bar. I needed no translation.
   Nor did
Mr. Abbott. He scurried to his seat, his head low.
   Now
that the entertainment had ended, I returned to my food search and discovered an
object more intriguing—a curve of thick white glass—near the heel
of Eddy's shoe. It had seemingly appeared from nowhere. My heart beat faster,
railing against my ribcage.Bump-bump,
bump-bump. A regular at drinking establishments, I'd found numerous items
over the years. A button engraved with a mouse, a snippet of lace that smelled
more like a mouse than the button, and the thumb, just the thumb, mind you, of
a fur-lined mitten that tasted more like a mouse than the other two. But I'd
never found anything of this sort. It reminded me of a clamshell, but smaller.
   I sniffed
the item. A sharp odor struck my nose, provoking the chain of sneezes I'd
staved off earlier. The scent reminded me of the medicine Sissy occasionally
took. In retaliation, I batted the half-sphere along the floorboards where it
came to rest against the pair of working boots I'd seen earlier. Their owner
wore a short, hip-length coat and a flat cap—a countrified costume. Mr.
Shakey's alcohol must not have been to his liking, for a flask stuck from the
pocket of his coat. "The guv'ment's gonna make the Trans-Allegheny a state
one day," he said to the gentleman who'd won Eddy's paper.
   "It
will never happen," the portly man said. "Not as long as Tyler's in
office."
   "Tyler?"
Eddy whispered. He kept his back to the two, half-aware of their conversation,
and spoke to himself. "I should like to work for Tyler's men. I should
like to…" He rubbed his face. "Smith said he would appoint me.
Promised he would."
   The man
in boots didn't bother with Eddy. "You'll see," he said to the portly
man. "One day we'll split. Then there'll be no more scrapin' and bowin' to
Virginia."
   "Leave
it to a border ruffian to talk politics," he replied.
   The man
in boots thumbed his nose. "My politics didn't bother you before, Mr.
Uppity."
   Humans
typically followedmister andmiss with a formal name. I'd learned
that from Sissy when she called me Miss Cattarina and from Josef when he
addressed Eddy as Mister Poe, pronouncing itmeester. Muddy, too, had contributed to my education. Always the
proper one, she insisted on calling our neighbors Mister Balderdash and Miss
Busybody, though never to their faces. Out of respect, I surmised. At least now
I knew the older, fleshier gentleman's name.
   "You
think we need a Virginiaand a West
of Virginia?" Mr. Uppity huffed. "Not hardly."
   Weary
of their jabber, I hit the lopsided ball again. It spun and ricocheted off
Eddy's heel. Then I wiggled my hind end and…pounced! When the object
surrendered, I sat back to study its curves. It studied me in return with a
sky-colored iris. I thought back to the picture Eddy had showed me in the paper
and the word he'd uttered—murder.
The rest of the tavern had certainly used up the subject. And while details of
the crime hovered beyond my linguistic reach, I knew my toy was connected. If
not, some other numskull had lost his eye. Either way, humans were much too
cavalier with their body parts.
   ~Buy
the Book ~



Взято из Флибусты, http://flibusta.net/b/586437
