
   Volker Kutscher
   THE MARCH FALLEN
   I could not possibly eat as much as I would like to throw up.Max Liebermann, upon seeing the torchlight procession make its way through the Brandenburger tor on the evening of 30th January 1933
   For Uwe Heldt [Картинка: i_001.png] 
   PART I
   FIRE
   Saturday 25th February to
   Thursday 2nd March 1933A faithful soldier, without fear,He loved his girl for one whole year,For one whole year and longer yet,His love for her, he’d never forget.‘DER TREUE HUSAR’, 18th CENTURY GERMAN FOLK SONG
   Fire, phenomenon arising from the generation of heat and light. In solids or liquids,‘glow’; in gases, ‘flame’.MEYERS GROSSES KONVERSATIONS-LEXICON, 1905
   1
   The dead man was propped against a steel pillar in the shadow of the elevated railway line, his chin sunk on his breast as if he were taking a nap. You could be forgiven for thinking he was sleeping it off, huddled as he was in an old, patched soldier’s overcoat, dressed in puttees and holey gloves, a thick woollen hat pulled low over his forehead.
   Detective Chief Inspector Wilhelm Böhm clutched his bowler hat to prevent the wind sweeping it off his head. They were directly under the elevated railway at Nollendorfplatz, barely a stone’s throw from the stairway, but no one had noticed the dead man, or, at least, no one who thought it necessary to notify the police. The deceased looked like a tramp, one of the many living rough on Berlin’s streets, whose number swelled with each passing year. Even in this bitter cold, he stank like someone who had been sleeping out for years: stale sweat, urine, alcohol.
   Bird droppings covered the lifeless body in a thin, blotchy film, from the shoes up to the woollen hat. Perched on the struts overhead, a colony of pigeons ensured that the surrounding pavement was also soiled. Hardly surprising that most pedestrians passed under the railway line elsewhere.
   A uniformed cop on his rounds at Nollendorfplatz had – after how many days? – discovered a pool of blood under the inert body and alerted Homicide at Alex. Sergeant Breitzke’s satisfaction at getting rid of the deceased without having to involve his own precinct was plain to see. No one from the 174th would be scrambling to investigate the death of an unwashed vagrant.
   Placing a scarf over his nose and mouth, Böhm examined the corpse. A thin trickle of blood had run from the left nostril onto the pavement, forming a pool that had by now coagulated. Or frozen: at these temperatures it was impossible to say. Blood on the overcoat had seeped into the fabric.
   Gingerly, Böhm scoured the dead man’s pockets, finding a ragged old service record, one corner of which was singed, as if its owner had taken a cigarette lighter to it. He unfolded the greasy, worn document. The reservistHeinrich Wosniak, born 20th March 1894 in Hagen/Westfalen, had joined the1st Guards Reserve Infantry Regiment on the Eastern Front in August 1915, shortly before it was posted to Flanders. He had survived the trenches, only to perish in his soldier’s overcoat.
   The majority of Berlin’s beggars wore soldier’s clothing; clothing that the men, often hideously crippled, had kept since the war. Having sacrificed their health for the Fatherland, no one gave a damn. There was little sympathy, and certainly no gratitude, for the men who had risked everything for the patriotism of those left behind…
   ‘Should I start securing the evidence, Sir?’ Detective Reinhold Gräf blew clouds of breath into the February air.
   Böhm hauled himself into a standing position. Away from the dead man he could breathe freely again. ‘Please. Kronberg’s men are still in Wedding, we won’t be seeing them today.’ He gestured towards the evidence kit in Gräf’s hand. ‘We’ll just have to make do with what we have. Take alook around, see if you can’t find something. Cigarette stubs, footprints, that sort of thing. Not much footfall here. Any trace on the pavement could be a clue.’
   Gräf put down the case and snapped open the lock. ‘What about fingerprints?’ he asked.
   ‘Leave that to me, but I wouldn’t get your hopes up. What kind of person leaves the house without gloves in this weather?’ Böhm looked around. ‘Where’s Steinke?’
   ‘Trying to get the camera out of the boot.’
   Gräf took a packet of marking tags and a handful of evidence containers and got down to work; Böhm turned towards the uniformed cop.
   ‘Heinrich Wosniak. Name mean anything to you?’
   ‘I don’t know what any of that lot are called.’ The man had a Berlin accent.
   ‘Then perhaps you’ve seen him before?’
   ‘Come again?’
   ‘This is your beat, isn’t it? Maybe you’ve seen him somewhere? Begging, or sleeping on a park bench? Something like that.’
   Sergeant Breitzke shrugged.‘I’d need to take a closer look.’ The dead man’s head was so low on his chest, his matted hair so far over his forehead that his face was barely visible.
   ‘We can’t move him until the evidence has been secured. You’ll have to wait until then,’ Böhm said.
   ‘Hold on a minute!’ Breitzke sounded distinctly less bored as he gestured towards the pock-marked skin underneath the dead man’s hat. ‘It could be Kartoffel. He hangs around Nolle, over by the U-Bahn, cadging off passers-by.’
   ‘I thought you didn’t know what any ofthat lot were called?’
   ‘It’s a nickname.’
   ‘Kartoffel.’ Böhm said.Potato.‘You don’t know his real name?’
   ‘Like I just said.’
   ‘Wait until we’ve finished with the camera. Then see if you’re right.’
   Sergeant Breitzke appeared unenthusiastic, but nodded.
   Böhm heard someone cursing quietly. Cadet Steinke had an unwieldy camera wedged under his arm, its heavy tripod draped over his shoulder. Böhm doubted whether the law graduate, who had come to the Castle straight from the lecture theatre, would amount to much. After almost nine months he still acted like a novice, except when it came to rank and pay grades. Even so, Steinke had a good chance of passing the year, which would make him a superior of Gräf, who lacked the ambition to sit the inspector’s examination but was a better criminal investigator. Böhm hoped that Steinke would flunk out; there were enough incompetent inspectors at Alex as it was.
   ‘Steinke, at last!’
   ‘I feel like a packhorse,’ the cadet said, administering a sharp kick to the dead man.
   ‘What are you doing?’
   ‘Checking he’s dead, not just intoxicated.’
   ‘If he wasn’t dead, we wouldn’t be here,’ Böhm said. ‘Don’t they teach you not to touch anything until the evidence is secured?’
   ‘Of course, but…’
   ‘Besides which: how about showing a dead man a little more respect?’
   ‘Forgive me, Sir, but this is a vagrant, a… down-and-out. I’m wondering why we’re here in the first place.’
   ‘Are you implying that a man like this doesn’tdeserve to have us investigate the circumstances of his death?’
   ‘I’m just saying.’
   ‘Well don’t. Concentrate on putting up your camera, and get a move on.’
   Steinke opened his mouth to reply just as a train pulled into the station above and drowned him out. He groaned and began unfolding the tripod stand.
   Böhm fetched soot powder, brush and adhesive film from the evidence kit, and set about dusting the steel column. He didn’t find any prints near the dead man, but spied three about one and a half metres up, two of them well-preserved and one half-erased. He started transferring the prints onto thefilm as Steinke clicked the shutter release. The rivets in the steel column reflected the flash, and the garish light made the corpse look wan and dead for the first time, not just drunk.
   Böhm took the prints to the murder wagon for labelling. Sitting on the backseat, he glanced through the window at the assiduous Gräf, who was lifting a cigarette stub from the ground with tweezers and marking its position; then at Steinke, who maneuvered the camera as if he still didn’t see why they were here in the first place.
   ‘A detective inspector in the making,’ he muttered, bagging the first print.
   ‘These days you need only be in the right party to forge a career.’
   Böhm turned around. Next to the murder wagon stood Dr Magnus Schwartz, spruce as ever, in his right hand a black leather doctor’s bag.
   ‘Careful, Doctor.’ Böhm motioned with his chin towards Steinke. ‘These youngsters hear everything.’
   ‘The same to you, Böhm, but I won’t be silenced. This madness will pass soon enough. The elections are next week.’
   ‘Let’s hope so.’
   These days people like Steinke, who had been part of the National Socialist Students’ Association at university, were in the ascendant, and it wasn’t only Dr Schwartz who hoped the Reichstag elections would change all that. Germany was still a democracy, however much the Nazis babbled on about a national uprising.
   Schwartz set down his bag.‘You’re not exactly hereen masse,’ he said.
   ‘I’m just glad I didn’t have to cycle out, what with ED’s hands being tied.’
   ‘What can you do?’ Schwartz said. ‘There’s a lot happening right now. Another round of elections, our nation’s health at an all-time low. I’m telling you, it’s worse than any flu epidemic.’ He gestured towards the corpse. ‘This one hasn’t fallen prey to the new politics, mind.’
   ‘Nor the flu.’
   ‘You already know the cause of death? Then what am I doing here?’
   ‘He didn’t freeze either.’ They approached the corpse, where Steinke was taking close-up shots. ‘I think that’ll do it, Steinke. Let the doctor get on with his work.’
   Sergeant Breitzke, who had been waiting patiently, saw his chance.‘Excuse me, Sir,’ he said to Böhm, ‘but before the doctor… I mean: you said yourself that I should take a closer look at the dead man once he’s been photographed…’
   ‘I did?’
   ‘Because…’ Breitzke looked at his pocket watch. ‘It’s about time I got on with my rounds.’
   ‘Fine,’ Böhm said sternly. He gripped the deceased by the hair and carefully pulled his head up from his breast until Heinrich Wosniak stared at them reproachfully out of dead eyes. Scarring on the right side of his face really did call to mind a shrivelled potato. His right ear scarcely existed, and his right eye was missing its eyebrow. His face looked like odds and ends glued together, and there was no mistaking the bitterness in its features.
   ‘Yeah, that’s Kartoffel.’ Breitzke said. ‘Just like I said. Can I go now?’
   ‘The nickname’s apt,’ Böhm said. ‘What happened to him?’
   ‘A french flamethrower? Search me. He looked like that the first time I chased him off Nollendorfplatz.’
   ‘Chased him off?’
   ‘He could be a real pest. You have to do something.’
   ‘Off you go, Sergeant. Someone has to keep our streets safe.’ Breitzke saluted and was about to turn away when Böhm added: ‘See that you get your written report to me by the end of the day.’ Breitzke saluted a second time and made a swift exit.
   Dr Schwartz leaned over the dead man.‘Nasty burns. Second or third degree.’
   ‘So, they are a relic from the war?’
   ‘His scars aren’t as old as that. If you ask me, he sustained these injuries two or three years ago at most.’ Schwartz took a magnifying glass from his bag along with a little flashlight, which he shone inside the dead man’s nose.
   Böhm looked on, growing more and more impatient the longer the doctor held his tongue. He shifted from one leg to the other, biting back the question on his lips.
   Meantime, Schwartz had placed the flash between his teeth and was muttering to himself.‘I’m not certain,’ he said, ‘but it wouldn’t surprise me if someone had driven a knitting needle through the poor man’s nose and into his brain.’
   ‘A knitting needle?’
   ‘Something like that, a long, sharp object. Simple but effective.’
   ‘Could it have been an accident? Was he trying to clean his nose with an unsuitable object?’
   ‘Not to speak ill of the dead, but I don’t think your man here cared much for hygiene. Besides: he’d still be holding the offending weapon. At the very least it would be lying somewhere close by.’
   ‘What can you say about the time of death?’
   Schwartz gazed at the corpse. Frost and pigeon droppings made it seem as if it had been coated with icing sugar.‘In these temperatures it can be hard to say. He could have been here for days. A frozen corpse doesn’t decompose in the usual way.’
   ‘Then I should wait for the results of the autopsy?’
   ‘I can’t see that the post-mortem will provide any more clarity. I could have the meteorological service send me the weather reports from the last few days, but even then, an exact estimate of the time of death is unlikely. The man could have been here a day, or a week.’
   Böhm was disappointed.
   ‘The best thing would be to look for witnesses. Perhaps some passer-by knows how long the poor devil has been lying here dead, or at least unconscious. Damn it…’
   One of the pigeons on the steel struts overhead had left a bright-coloured splodge on Schwartz’s dark winter coat. He tried to clean the mess with a lily-white handkerchief, but succeeded only in smearing the stain across his shoulder. ‘If pigeons could talk,’ he said, ‘then perhaps we’d be getting somewhere. Sadly all they do is coo and defecate. I suggest we get the corpse movednow. It’s too dangerous for me here. I’d rather continue in Hannoversche Strasse, where that lot are barred.’
   Böhm looked at the corpse, examining the thin layer of faeces that covered it – and wondered if the pigeons couldn’t be of some use after all.
   2
   Wie kütt die Mösch, die Mösch, die Mösch bei uns in de Küch?
   The voice of Willi Ostermann rasped from the loudspeakers, drowning out the babble of people jostling towards the escalators in the atrium of Tietz department store. Some resourceful salesperson had connected an electric turntable to the tannoy, so that even in Cologne’s largest mall there was no escaping the vernacular hit.
   Listening to old Ostermann competing against the hum of shoppers, Rath felt as if he had never been away. The peculiar electricity that filled Cologne in the days leading up to Ash Wednesday fetched him home immediately. How many years had he been living in a city where this was alien? Sensing that familiar charge, he realised he had missed carnival fever – even the inevitable strains of the great Willi Ostermann.
   The mannequins in the display window were decked out as gypsies, Mexicans, musketeers or clowns; they wore striped trousers and sparkly jackets, false noses and colourful little hats adorned with paper streamers. Stoical of gaze they watched shoppers barge past shelves full of wigs, masks and make-up, past clothes racks with slanted hats, short skirts and factory-made costumes. Everywhere was a sense of panic; only two days until Rosenmontag, and the start of the official parade.
   ‘It doesn’t have to be anything special,’ Rath said out loud. ‘Or original.’
   ‘You won’t find anything original at Tietz.’ The blond man next to him looked sceptical. ‘All of this will be worn a thousand times over in the next few days.’
   Laughter lines formed under the elegant brim of the man’s felt hat. Paul smiled with his whole face, and looked on the world’s daily madness with a kind of fundamental, ironic detachment. Rath and Paul Wittkamp had been friends since childhood, since the Rath family had moved out to Klettenberg just before the war. Even if they didn’t see much ofone another these days, a single glance was all it took to reconnect. For now, in front of a shelf of false noses.
   Ostermann was replaced byDie Monacos. Der treue Husar blasted from the loud speakers.
   ‘The main thing is that no one should recognise me,’ Rath said.
   ‘Now, now,’ Paul wagged his index finger. ‘Behave yourself. You’ll soon be a married man.’
   ‘With the emphasis on “soon”,’ Rath said, reaching for the biggest rubber nose he could find. ‘Let’s celebrate Carnival first, like in the old days.’
   He didn’t say why he really wanted to remain incognito during the festivities: that he was still afraid of being seen in Cologne by one of LeClerk’s reporters, and that it might all start again. The headlines back then, after the fatal incident in Neusser Strasse, had cut much deeper than he would admit even to Paul. Only in Berlin had he regained his equilibrium.
   He examined the rubber nose, a real hooter complete with thick, black glasses and false moustache. Without further ado he held the disguise in front of his face.
   ‘How do I look?’
   ‘With a black hat and black frock coat you could be straight out of the pages ofDer Stürmer.’
   Rath glanced in the nearest mirror. He really did look like an anti-Semitic caricature, like one of the Isidor sketchesDer Angriff had used to denigrate former Berlin Deputy Commissioner Bernhard Weiss.
   ‘You think I’ll cop it from the SA?’
   Paul shrugged.‘More likely from a Jew who thinks you’re making fun of him.’
   ‘There are thousands of these noses,’ Rath said. ‘Who knows how many people will be wearing them. But if I go for a red-and-white striped hat I’ll just look like an idiot.’
   ‘Do what you like, Gereon. But one thing’s for sure: with a get-up like that there’s no chance of you turning any heads. At least I won’t have to keep an eye on you.’
   ‘So, that’s what you had in mind?’
   ‘What kind of best man would allow his groom to stray from the path of virtue at this late stage?’
   ‘Do I look like I’m planning to?’
   Paul laughed out loud.‘Not with that nose!’ He clapped Rath on the shoulder. ‘Now for heaven’s sake go and pay for it, then we can head to mine and rummage through the dressing-up box. Or do you still want to go to Cords?’
   ‘No, I’ve had enough of department stores for one day.’
   They had been traipsing through the shops all morning on the look-out for wedding rings, before striking lucky at a jeweller’s in Hohe Strasse, where they commissioned two simple but elegant rings which Paul would collect en route to the wedding in Berlin. There would be no risk of Charly seeing them before the big day.
   Rath hadn’t skimped on cost, partly to ease his conscience. Even if he didn’t like to admit it, his trip to Cologne was a kind of escape from Berlin, from everyday life, from Charly. After months of toing and froing they had set a date, and the closer it came the more uncomfortable he felt. Paul’s invitation to spend Carnival together had been heaven-sent, especially with Gennat badgering him to use some of his overtime.
   At the Schildergasse exit, Rath thought he spied a familiar face, but it took a moment for the penny to drop: ten years ago, when the Cologne Police was still under the supervision of the British occupying forces, a pickpocket, one of his first arrests. Schürmann, Eduard Schürmann, known as ‘Two-Finger Ede’. Apparently his three-year sentence had done nothing to rehabilitate him – not if his current overfamiliarity with a stout, bowler-hatted gentleman was anything to go by.
   ‘See you outside.’ Rath pressed his shopping into Paul’s hands and burst onto the street. Despite losing Ede’s brown hat for a time, he kept the fat man in his sights. The victim didn’t seem to have noticed anything, and Rath had no choice but to jostle past him to grab hold of Ede’s shoulder.
   ‘Aren’t you getting a little old for this?’
   Eduard Schürmann froze and turned around. He was hiding something black behind his back.
   ‘Do we know each other?’
   ‘I see old habits die hard.’ Rath gave a friendly smile. ‘Still targeting the fatties, then?’
   Ede’s face turned a shade paler. ‘Inspector,’ he attempted to smile. ‘Didn’t recognise you there. I heard you’d moved on to better things.’
   ‘Like you? No jack today, or was I too quick for you?’
   ‘What are you talking about?’
   ‘Jack Crook. You should hand it over. The wallet you just lifted. Unless you want to pay a visit to the big building next to Cords Department Store.’ Rath pointed towards the tower of Police Headquarters, which rose dark and menacing into the grey sky around Schildergasse.
   ‘That’s all in the past, Inspector. I’m a watchmaker these days.’ Schürmann had a strong Cologne accent.
   ‘You’re telling me you’ve taken up a trade?’
   ‘It’s true, Inspector, I was sent down, and I deserved it. But in Klingelpütz I decided to become a better man. I’ve got my own little shop. Here.’ He handed Rath a business card. ‘I’ve gone straight. Just ask my wife.’
   Rath looked at the card, momentarily confused.
   E. Schürmann, Watchmaker
   Unter Krahnenbäumen/Ecke Eigelstein
   ‘Ede Schürmann,’ he said. ‘The name doesn’t exactly inspire trust. Nor does the address…’
   ‘Call me Eduard, it sounds more respectable… and people by the railway station need watches, too.’
   Meantime Paul had caught up.‘What’s the matter? Do you need a hand?’
   Rath pointed towards the fat man, whose bowler hat was moving further and further away in the milling mass on Schildergasse.‘Stop that man over there. The fat one with the bowler.’
   ‘Has he committed a crime?’
   ‘The opposite. He’s the victim.’
   Paul looked from Rath to Ede and back, as if waiting for an explanation. When none came he shrugged his shoulders and set off.
   ‘My friend will detain the man you robbed,’ Rath said to Ede. ‘And I’ll return his wallet.’
   ‘I don’t know what you’re talking about.’
   ‘Hand me the wallet and all is forgotten. Or how about the two of us stop in at Krebsgasse for a full body search.’
   ‘I really don’t know what…’ Schürmann hesitated and looked at the ground. ‘You mean this wallet?’
   A black wallet lay on the pavement, closer to Rath’s feet than Ede’s. Ede made a move to pick it up but Rath got there first. The leather was still soft and warm, as if someone had been holding it in their hand. Rath opened it, finding a little change, a ten and a twenty-mark note, a few trading stamps, and, in the side pocket, an identification card of the sort the Brits had introduced during the occupation. The fat man had been a few pounds lighter in 1923.Wilhelm Klefisch, it said underneath the photograph.
   ‘Someone must have lost it. No wonder in this crowd…’
   A stern look was enough to stall Ede’s explanation. ‘I’m nobody’s fool,’ Rath said. ‘If it wasn’t for my good nature you’d be dining out of town this evening. Is that clear?’
   ‘Crystal, Inspector.’ Ede bowed submissively.
   ‘We’ll be keeping an eye on you, Herr Schürmann. So make sure your fingers don’t go straying into any foreign pockets. Do we understand each other?’
   ‘Absolutely, Inspector.’
   ‘Good. Now scram.’
   Eduard Schürmann gave a second bow and did as bidden.
   Rath found Paul next to the fat man, who was gesticulating wildly.‘Wilhelm Klefisch?’ he asked. ‘You’ve lost something.’
   Klefisch felt in his overcoat before taking the wallet gratefully.‘Thank you. Where did you find it?’
   ‘By the entrance to Tietz.’
   Klefish opened the black leather wallet and counted the notes and coins. Once, twice, and a third time.‘There are fifty marks missing,’ he said, looking reproachful.
   ‘Are you sure?’
   ‘Quite sure. I don’t want to jump to conclusions but…’ He looked to Paul for assistance, perhaps uncertain as to his role. At any rate he seemed to take Rath for a thief, albeit one with an unusually sophisticated trick.
   ‘You can rest assured…’ Rath took out his police identification, ‘if that money really is gone, then I didn’t take it.’
   Klefisch examined the identification, still suspicious.‘Well, someone must have.’
   And I know who! Rath thought. Only, he’s long gone… ‘We can go to police headquarters and report it but, speaking as a police officer, I don’t hold out much hope. Anyone could have taken it in the crowd back there. Just be happy you still have your papers.’
   ‘Very well. Let’s drop it, but I must insist on taking your name.’
   So much for my good nature, Rath thought, folding Ede’s card smaller and smaller in his hand.
   3
   After almost three hours rummaging through the archive and card-index cabinets, Reinhold Gräf entered the office waving the file in his hand. Böhm looked up from his desk. Steinke pretended not to be interested, but not even that arrogant little upstart could spoil Gräf’s mood, not now that they had Wosniak’s name on file.
   The dead bum might have ruined his weekend plans, but at least they had a starting point. Luckily Conny never complained when the job got in the way. Gräf was grateful, of course, but what could he do? Police work and chance operations went hand in hand.
   ‘Our man from Nollendorfplatz is already on file,’ he said, placing the folder on Böhm’s desk. The detective chief inspector gave a nod of acknowledgement. From Böhm, that was as good as praise.
   ‘I can’t say I’m surprised, Sir,’ Steinke said with pointed boredom. ‘With an antisocial like that.’
   ‘If you’re so clever,’ Böhm said, ‘how is it you haven’t made police commissioner?’
   ‘All I’m saying, Sir, is that rooting through the files isn’t enough. You have to trust your instincts.’ Steinke tapped his chest. ‘I’d have bet any money that bum was known to police. As soon as I saw his face. A mug like that, you just know.’
   ‘Perhaps those instincts of yours aren’t as trustworthy as you think,’ said Gräf.
   ‘What do you mean? You said yourself he was on police file…’
   ‘Heinrich Wosniak does indeed appear on file, but not as a suspect.’
   ‘Then what?’
   ‘As a victim.’
   Böhm opened the file. ‘Arson,’ he said.
   Steinke came over.
   ‘Heinrich Wosniak was the victim of an arson attack,’ Gräf went on. ‘He survived by the skin of his teeth. Perhaps I could make my report?’
   Böhm grunted his approval.
   ‘Heinrich Wosniak was the victim of an arson attack, which took place on New Year’s Eve ’31. Seven dead, three seriously injured, one of whom succumbed to his injuries five days later. All of them beggars or homeless. The wooden shack where they lived on Bülowplatz went up in flames.’
   ‘I remember. It was in the press. So one of the survivors is our man… Am I right in thinking it was a child who started it?’ Böhm asked.
   ‘Hannah Singer. Born 1916.’
   ‘Was she messing around with fireworks? How did it happen?’
   ‘It was no accident. Hannah Singer was picked up by colleagues outside the shack. The matches she’d used to spark the flames were by her feet. She had a whole suitcase of them; she sold the things.’
   ‘Why did she do it?’
   ‘If only we knew,’ Gräf shrugged. ‘According to our records Hannah Singer was interrogated a total of eleven times after the attack. Each of the transcripts is a page long. There are no answers, just questions. She didn’t utter a word.’
   ‘No discernible motive?’
   ‘No motive, but an interesting detail: Hannah Singer is the daughter of one of the victims.’
   Böhm looked at Gräf. ‘What did you say?’
   ‘There was a theory the explanation could lie there, but not even the courts could prise it out of her.’
   ‘Is it possible her father abused her?’
   ‘Heinz Singer lost both of his legs in the war. The poor bastard wasn’t in a position to abuse anyone.’
   Böhm nodded thoughtfully and leafed through the file. ‘An act of mercy perhaps? A kind of assisted dying for her crippled father.’
   ‘Death by fire as an act of mercy? What about the six innocents who died with him?’
   ‘Then hatred. There must be a reason for something like this.’
   ‘If there is, we haven’t found it. A psychological report certified Hannah Singer as paranoid schizophrenic. It seems life on the streets messed with her head. The judge had her committed to a lunatic asylum.’
   ‘Psychology!’ Steinke said. ‘Jewish mumbo-jumbo. Murderers belong on the scaffold, not in a lunatic asylum.’
   ‘She was only fifteen. Even with a full confession she wouldn’t have been executed,’ Böhm said. ‘As a trained lawyer, you ought to know that.’
   ‘Laws can be rewritten.’
   ‘Luckily not without a Reichstag majority. Which is something no one has… not even your Nazis.’
   ‘That could change.’
   ‘Enough big talk, Steinke. You’re a CID officer, or at least you soon will be. Whether you like it or not, you have to comply with the laws of the land.’
   ‘Can’t a man say what he’s thinking anymore?’
   Böhm glared at him. ‘Our work would be a damn sight easier if you kept your opinions to yourself.’
   4
   Gereon Rath gazed at Charly with that strange look in his eyes, defiant, withdrawn, and yet above all surprised. He was on duty, suit rumpled, impatiently staring into the camera lens, hands nestled deep inside coat pockets. The photograph had been taken by Reinhold Gräf about two years before, at a crime scene in Tiergarten. Now it stood on her desk for the sake of her female colleagues, who had presented it last summer following her engagement with Gereon. Though given partly to tease the new girl in G, Charly hadn’t wanted to appear unappreciative. Besides, she liked it: Reinhold was a good photographer.
   She caught herself thinking back to her time in A Division, when she had often struck out with him, questioning witnesses, even the odd suspect. Wilhelm Böhm didn’t seem to care that she had been hired as a stenographer; he’d recognised her talent. Police work had been enjoyable before she became a candidate for inspector.
   Now she was part of the system and what did they have her doing? Investigating childish pranks.
   The prints Superintendent Wieking had requested from the lab all bore the same image. A bare brick wall, the like of which could be seen a hundred times over in Wedding, Friedrichshain, Neukölln or any other workers’ district. Daubed across it in white:Deutschland erwache, Juda verrecke! Germany awake, Jew die! The penmanship was expert, as if the culprit had all the time in the world. Someone else had run a red line through the slogan and scrawled hastily underneath:Deutschland, mach die Augen auf, Hitler hat ein Ar(i)schgesicht!
   Open your eyes, Germany, but then the“i” inArisch was crossed out, rendering Hitler’s“Aryan face” Hitler’s“arse-face”. Reading the sentence, Charly couldn’t help but smile. Her colleague Karin van Almsick, meanwhile, studied the photos with deadly seriousness, magnifying glass in hand.
   ‘I don’t know why we’re only hunting those responsible for thesecond sentence,’ Charly said. ‘The point is, it’s forbidden to scrawl political slogans, no matter how nice they are to look at.’
   ‘It also depends on the message!’ There was astonishment in Karin’s voice at having to explain something so obvious. ‘Where would we be if any old lout could get away with besmirching someone else’s property?’
   Any old lout. So, that’s why the photos had landed on Charly’s desk. Because the political police suspected the slogan was the work of a wild posse, and dealing with gangs of youths fell firmly within the remit of Women’s CID. The Politicals had enough on their plate with adults whose views were out of sync with the times.
   ‘I’ll bet you anything it was theRote Ratten. They were scrawling that sort of thing everywhere last summer.’ Karin brought such zeal to the task that Charly started to feel ill. With her magnifying glass and checked skirt, her desk neighbour looked like a female Sherlock Holmes.
   TheRote Ratten, or Red Rats, were teenagers from around Kösliner Strasse, who mostly engaged in harmless skirmishes with other youths, but occasionally angered the SA by daubing slogans across theirSturmlokal or tipping sand into the tanks of their cars. The Rats might not be easily integrated into any party machine, whether that of the Communists – who still held sway in Kösliner Strasse – or the Social Democrats, but they were, most definitely, Red.
   Which was precisely why they were a thorn in Friederike Wieking’s flesh. Charly’s section chief made no secret of her delight that the new Reich chancellor was Adolf Hitler, nor that she hoped his cabinet would survive longer than the two months that had become customary in recent times.
   Charly was among those who hoped the madness would soon pass, but the approval with which Hitler’s cabinet had been greeted among the WKP, the Women’s CID, sent a shiver down her spine. Not that the WKP was representative of Germany, and certainly not of Berlin. Charly couldn’t believe that the ‘national uprising’, as the Nazis had dubbed Hitler’s appointment, would be sanctioned in any way by a majority of Germans.
   ‘The Red Rats. Could be.’ She shrugged. ‘What happens if we actually catch them, and succeed in building a case?’
   ‘They’ll get their just deserts.’
   ‘Or be beaten black and blue by SA auxiliary officers.’
   ‘What if they are? A few slaps never hurt anyone. If their parents aren’t going to then…’
   Charly stood up.‘Excuse me,’ she said. ‘I need a cigarette break.’
   Karin nodded.‘If you go past the kitchen, can you put some water on? I was about to make us a fresh pot of tea.’
   ‘Of course.’ Charly attempted a smile.
   She was glad not to encounter any colleagues in the kitchen as she filled the battered kettle and set it on the electric stove. Understanding the crimes the WKP handled – youth crime, girl gangs, underage prostitutes – she had quickly made her peace with it, even if she missed working in Homicide and envied Gereon his role with Gennat. Butthis, now? This was no longer about sitting on her backside in an overheated office, this was about turning innocuous pranks into serious political crimes; about hunting down gangs of youths who rejected the new Reich chancellor and, unlike so many others, were prepared to voice their scorn.
   The canteen was equally quiet. She got a coffee and a slice of nutcake from the buffet. Though no great fan of cake, Charly sometimes treated herself to a slice in memory of the old days. Meetings with the portly head of homicide, Ernst Gennat, had almost always meant cake. For Gennat, too, Charly had been more than a stenographer; he had recognised her abilities.
   Carrying her tray through the rows of tables, it was as if the memory of A Division somehow conjured the man sitting alone with a cup of coffee. Wilhelm Böhm, keeping his distance behind a pillar. ‘Evening, Sir. Mind if I join you?’
   Böhm gave a start, but his expression soon brightened. ‘Charly! Of course, take a seat!’
   She set down her tray.‘Long time no see.’
   ‘You can say that again.’
   The nutcake was far too dry, no comparison with the cake in Gennat’s office. She had to take a sip of coffee before she could continue.
   Böhm bridged the silence. ‘How are you? Lots to do in G?’
   ‘Depends on how you look at it.’ She lit a Juno. ‘Mostly routine. No comparison with Homicide. Right now we’re turning harmless graffiti into serious crime.’
   ‘Times are changing. Only today I was advised not to expend too much energy investigating the violent death of a homeless man. Apparently the police have more important things to do.’
   ‘Gennat said that?’
   Böhm shook his head. ‘Some jumped-up auxiliary officer. An SA man who was called by an angry citizen, this morning at Nollendorfplatz. Didn’t make any difference that there were only three of us in attendance, or that we were dealing with an unnatural death.’
   ‘Most civilians don’t understand what we do.’
   ‘Yes, but, thanks to our friend Herr Göring, this brown ignoramus gets to call himself a police officer. We can do without his sort at a homicide investigation. Auxiliary police!’
   ‘I’m sure that’s true of plenty of seasoned officers as well.’
   ‘It’s good to hear your voice, Charly. It reminds me of happier times.’
   ‘I’d be only too glad to be seconded to Homicide again.’
   ‘You know your superior doesn’t approve. Superintendent Wieking can be – how shall I put this? – rather forthright.’
   ‘You’re telling me!’ She stubbed out her cigarette, drank the last of her coffee and made to get up.
   ‘Actually, Charly, do you have a minute? I… I’d like to hear your opinion on something. It’s about…’ Böhm stirred his coffee cup even though it was empty. ‘It has to do with pigeon droppings and… God! I sound like such an idiot!’ The teaspoon landed on the saucer with a clink. ‘It’s best if I start from the beginning. Sit down, I’ll get us some more coffee.’
   Charly thought of her office, her colleague, of the potted plants by the window sill, and the by now lukewarm tea Karin had brewed for her. She nodded, and took out her cigarette case for a second time.
   5
   Tea cups clinked on Frieda’s tray as she entered the drawing room, and Rath shifted uneasily in his chair. He’d have felt more comfortable at one of his mother’s coffee mornings than in the company of these two men. They looked on in silence as Frieda filled their cups, taking up the thread only when she had closed the door behind her.
   ‘Thanks for inviting me, Engelbert.’ The man by the window, sitting in the room’s most comfortable chair, stirred his coffee and leaned back.
   ‘Of course, Konrad. I know how important it is to relax between meetings. Carnival, an election campaign, and the city still needs to be run.’
   ‘Not for much longer.’ Konrad Adenauer gazed onto Siebengebirgsallee, where a black-painted official car was waiting. The chauffeur stood smoking by the garden fence. ‘I’m afraid I might soon have a little more time on my hands.’
   ‘How can you say that, Konrad? The Reichstag vote will give the Nazis something to think about, and a week later it will be the local elections. This madness will soon pass, mark my words. They lost millions of supporters in November; they’re on the way out.’
   ‘If only that were true.’ Their visitor sipped his tea. ‘No, no, Engelbert. My time as mayor is over.Our time is over. The Nazis won’t allow power to be wrested from them. Not now.’
   The mayor pronounced the word“Nazi” with a shorta, making it sound more like“Nazzi”.
   Rath was afraid the conversation would turn to politics; it almost always did with his father, and with this particular visitor it went without saying. Engelbert Rath was proud to be on first-name terms with the mayor of Cologne, a friendship that had proved instrumental to his career as police director down the years.
   Rath fished his cigarette case out of his pocket, knowing his father had refrained from his customary afternoon cigar out of consideration for the non-smoking Adenauer. Even so, he lit a cigarette and gazed out of the window. It was cold, and the chauffeur was back inside the sedan.
   Engelbert Rath threw his son an angry glance, before answering.‘Everything is still up for grabs. We’re in the middle of an election campaign, which is precisely the reason you refused to meet Hitler a week ago, a move I wholeheartedly agree with. The man was in Cologne as an electoral candidate, not in his capacity as Reich chancellor. Which is also why you had the swastika flags removed from the Deutzer Bridge.’
   ‘Correct. Because I want to see out my final days in office with dignity and resolve.’
   Adenauer set down his cup and fished a piece of paper out of his pocket, unfolded it and showed it to father and son. A pamphlet.ADENAUER MUST GO, Rath read.
   ‘It’s the only message that brown rabble are pedalling. I’d like to continue as mayor after 12th March, but I’m not counting on it. Gussie and the children are prepared for defeat.’ Adenauer stirred his tea, his thoughts elsewhere. ‘Hitler should have been countered with force a year ago. It’s too late now.’
   ‘I refuse to indulge your pessimism, Konrad! Hitler’s cabinet exists only by the grace of Hindenburg. If the brownshirts overstep the mark, the Reich president will clamp down on them. As for the voters…’
   ‘Politically speaking, Hindenburg’s a fool,’ Adenauer interrupted. ‘Just like that schemer, Papen.Hitler’s working at our behest, he’s supposed to have said in his gentleman’s club. To think, a man like that once belonged to our party, the Westphalian fussbudget!’
   ‘Our constituents will never give the brownshirts their votes. Catholic voters will stay loyal to the Centre Party!’
   ‘Maybe, but you’re forgetting the women. This Hitler’s got them all running around after him.’ Adenauer looked out of the window, as if Germany’s entire female population was assembled outside the Rath villa. ‘We never should have given them the vote.’
   ‘I don’t know about that… my Erika certainly won’t be voting for the Browns. Nor will your Gussie.’
   ‘The elections won’t change anything. The streets belong to the Nazis, and have done for some time. If need be they’ll get what they want by force.’
   ‘Politics, eh?’ Engelbert Rath seemed unable to conceive of a future in which he could no longer call upon his links to the Centre Party or Social Democrats, and certainly not enough to get worked up about it. ‘There are more important things in life,’ he said, but Gereon knew he didn’t mean it. For Engelbert Rath there was nothing more important than politics, at least where it served his professional advancement. ‘How are Gussie and the children?’
   ‘Thank you, they’re in good health. Though the SA are getting more and more brazen since they’ve been allowed to pose as auxiliary police officers. You ask them why they are loitering by the house and they say they’re guarding the street. Can’t you do something?’
   ‘My hands are tied.’ The great Engelbert Rath appeared suddenly weak, his all-powerful façade crumbling. ‘The SA has a mind of its own. Its commanding officers aren’t easily incorporated into conventional police hierarchy.’
   ‘That’s what I’m talking about. Our time is up.’ Adenauer set down his tea cup.
   Rath gazed out of the window. The chauffeur was outside again, lighting another cigarette. No doubt smoking wasn’t permitted inside the Cologne mayor’s official car.
   ‘How about you, young man?’ Adenauer asked, and it took Gereon a moment to realise the question was directed at him. The mayor fixed him with his narrow, Indian eyes. Without thinking, he sat up. ‘Can’t resist the pull of the Rhine?’
   ‘Just a holiday.’ Rath cleared his throat. ‘Chalked up too much overtime.’
   ‘How do you like Berlin? Settling in OK?’
   Rath shrugged.
   ‘Gereon is soon to be married,’ his father prompted. ‘To a Berliner, born-and-bred.’
   ‘Well then, congratulations.’
   ‘Thank you, Mayor.’
   ‘Where is the marriage taking place? Here in Cologne?’
   ‘We… uh… we have… first we have to…’
   ‘Gereon’s bride is Protestant,’ Engelbert Rath said, and it sounded like an apology.
   ‘What can I say? Berlin.’ Adenauer shook his head, apparently surprised that a place like the German capital even existed. ‘You’re here for Carnival too of course?’
   ‘Yes, of course. I mean: as well.’ Rath felt as though he were being interrogated. ‘I’m here mainly to visit my parents.’
   ‘And your lady bride? Is she with you? You must introduce us some time.’
   ‘I… No. Fräulein Ritter is working. She’s a CID cadet and…’
   ‘A police officer?’
   Rath nodded.‘Yes. A very good one too.’
   ‘We’ve already had the pleasure of Fräulein Ritter’s acquaintance,’ Engelbert Rath said. ‘A charming young lady.’ He paused briefly. ‘I’ve mentioned to Gereon that there’ll be a Rosenmontag parade again this year. Thanks to your support, Konrad.’
   ‘It’s the Cologne business world you have to thank.’
   ‘Your modesty does you credit. Now, I wanted to ask: tomorrow on the town hall balcony… I should have said something sooner, but my son’s appearance has put me off guard… Would it be too much to ask if…’
   ‘Of course not. There’s always space for a Rath on the balcony.’ Adenauer’s gaze wandered from Engelbert to Gereon Rath. ‘It would be a great honour if you could join us tomorrow, young man.’
   ‘Oh, thank you.’ Rath was so dumbfounded he couldn’t think of anything else to say.
   ‘Think nothing of it.’ Adenauer looked at him with his narrow eyes. ‘Perhaps you’ll consider returning to Cologne one day. We could use men like you in these troubled times.’
   ‘I’ll think about it, Mayor,’ Rath said, knowing that he wouldn’t. He’d never persuade Charly to move to Cologne, not with Erika and Engelbert Rath so close by. Besides, Berlin was his city now, that strange metropolis that offered so little by way of homeliness, but somehow got under your skin.
   Adenauer looked at his silver fob watch.‘My driver will be getting impatient.’ He stood up and shook both Raths by the hand. ‘A pleasure, Engelbert. Believe me, I appreciate your friendship now more than ever.’
   Engelbert Rath escorted the mayor out while Gereon stood at the window, lighting another cigarette. Adenauer’s car started up as Rath senior returned.
   ‘Box seats on the town hall balcony. To what do I owe the honour?’ Gereon said.
   ‘You just heard: you’re a Rath.’
   ‘What makes you think I want a box seat? Perhaps I prefer the worm’s eye view of the common man.’
   ‘This isn’t about what you want. At times like these it’s our duty as democrats to maintain a presence.’
   ‘Who says I’m a democrat?’
   ‘Gereon!’
   ‘Besides, how are the crowds looking up at us supposed to know? All they’ll see are bobbing heads. You know it’d be the same people on the balcony if wedidn’t have a democracy, don’t you?’
   ‘Konrad Adenauer wouldn’t be there. You’ve heard what the Nazis are saying about him.’
   ‘It’s all talk. They won’t feel so big after the election. You and your party colleagues will be back on top.’
   ‘I hope you’re right, but Konrad sees things differently.’
   ‘Adenauer’s just tired of office. He’s always had a pessimistic streak.’
   6
   The place reeked of disinfectant, cold floor wax and cigarette smoke. Charly lit a cigarette to distract herself. Outside, in the park, leafless treetops were swinging in the wind. The grounds of the Wittenauer Sanatorium were expansive, but in winter the impression was of desolation. A few years ago it had beenThe Municipal Insane Asylum, Berlin-Dalldorf, a name that was far more familiar to Charly.Did you bust out of Dalldorf? children on the street would shout, or:mind you don’t get sent to Dalldorf!
   Now here she was.
   ‘A Division want you to go to Reinickendorf and interrogate a girl,’ Friederike Wieking had said, ‘an insane Jewish arsonist.’
   Charly hadn’t told her superintendent that she’d already discussed the case with Wilhelm Böhm and even briefly looked at the file. Wieking didn’t enjoy parting with her officers, but was loath to turn down a request from Homicide Chief Ernst Gennat. The reputation of the newly formed Women’s CID was greatly enhanced by having its officers seconded to other departments.
   Charly had used Gereon’s Buick for the trip to Berlin North, knowing the S-Bahn would take too long. ‘You have a car?’ Karin van Almsick had asked in astonishment. Superintendent Wieking had insisted that Charly take her colleague, probably more as chaperone than aid. Charly had driven while Karin cowered silentlyon the passenger seat, pale-faced, one hand on the door handle, the other on her hat. Sitting in the room assigned to them by the asylum’s management – a visitors’ room with a vase of flowers on the table – her complexion was waxy-green.
   Charly opened the Singer patient file, consisting mostly of the psychological report Böhm had already shown her. Hannah Singer had been interrogated on a total of eleven occasions in the weeks following the attack but hadn’t uttered a word. At some point a colleague from the WKP had also tried, with no better results than her male counterparts, a fact which neither surprised nor disheartened Charly. She leafed through the report.
   It can be assumed that the patient’s silence is rooted in her profound social distrust, a clear indicator for a diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia. Additional symptoms can be found in the patient’s increasing self-neglect, which has led to her rejecting all forms of personal hygiene. Here, see also the patient’s unwillingness to take on food and her frequently occurring bouts of sleeplessness. The patient’s fundamentally depressive disposition suggests that the risk of suicide is high. We recommend that she continue to be kept under strict observation. It is possible that the patient’s previously identified substance abuse (morphine) has impacted upon, or perhaps even caused, her illness and accompanying delusional episodes. An immediate programme of withdrawal is therefore strongly advised.
   What kind of girl were they dealing with?
   Karin, whose face was slowly regaining its colour, had other things on her mind.‘I still don’t know what we’re doing here,’ she said, sounding like a stroppy adolescent.
   ‘I thought Wieking had already explained. We’re questioning a juvenile arsonist. Gently. It’s possible there’s a link to an ongoing investigation.’
   ‘I got that – but what are we supposed to ask her? The girl’s a lunatic. How’s she supposed to help us?’
   ‘Why don’t you let me do it?’ Charly tried to sound maternal. ‘Do you know short-hand?’
   ‘Of course.’
   ‘Take some notes. I’ll do the talking.’
   Karin didn’t appear to take umbrage at her demotion. On the contrary, she appeared relieved as she rummaged in her handbag, eventually producing a shorthand pad.
   Charly returned to the patient file, finding an envelope at the back which contained a photograph: a soldier from the World War, in the uniform of a reserve corporal, gazing out with solemn pride, confident the war would be won. It was how they all looked before being called to fight. When they returned their eyes were haunted. It was true of Charly’s father and many more besides, assuming, of course, they’d made it home in the first place.
   Heinz Singer, too, had looked different on his return. Charly had found his photo in the police file, among the victims from the Bülowplatz attack. The fire brigade had been on hand to douse the blaze, ensuring most of those who had suffocated in their sleep suffered no burns. Even so, the photo of the deceased Heinz Singer was shocking. The man was missing his legs, both high amputations.
   Hannah’s father before and after being broken by war.
   All of a sudden even Karin’s interest was piqued. The date and address of the studio were marked on the reverse of the photo.26th August 1914. Photographie J. Neumann, Usedomer Strasse 5, Berlin N 31.
   Charly took down the address and, as she was about to return the photo to the envelope, noticed a slip of paper with a paperclip still inside.Heinz Singer als Uffz. der Reserve, someone had scrawled, and underneath, the uniformed officer’s birth and death dates.7.3.1890 – 1.1.1932.
   ‘Her father?’ Karin asked.
   ‘He was one of the victims.’
   ‘An army corporal? Among all those vagrants and tramps?’
   ‘He wasn’t a corporal after the war, but a cripple. A grenade caught him, he had to have both his legs amputated. He…’
   The door opened with a slight creak. A nurse in starched whites stood in the doorframe, a female version of the boxer, Max Schmeling, holding the hand of a dark-haired girl in a light green nightshirt. The girl stared at the highly-polished asylum floor without lifting her gaze.
   Charly returned the photograph and note to the envelope. The sister grasped the patient’s shoulders and shunted her into the room. ‘Hannah Singer,’ she said. ‘You wanted to speak with her.’ She thrust the girl onto the free chair and stood behind her.
   Hannah Singer’s eyes remained stubbornly glued to the floor.
   ‘Many thanks, Sister…’ Charly said.
   ‘Charge Sister. Charge Sister Ingeborg.’ The sister glanced at her patient with disdain. ‘Don’t get your hopes up. Hannah has been with us thirteenth months and hasn’t spoken a word in that time.’
   ‘Is she mute?’ Karin asked, speaking of Hannah as if she were absent or hard of hearing. Clearly, she wasn’t: her hands, which lay flat on her lap, had twitched when Sister Ingeborg mentioned her name, her eyes likewise, pupils darting left then right, and back to the middle.
   ‘According to the doctor there’s nothing wrong with her. We assume she’s just chosen not to speak anymore. I wouldn’t either, if I’d done something like that. What is there left to say?’
   ‘Could I ask you to stop talking? So we can make a start.’ Charly addressed Charge Sister Ingeborg, but meant Karin too. Why couldn’t she just shut up for a change? Karin raised her eyebrows, reached for her pad and leaned back. She took the huff easily but was usually keen to make friends again. Charge Sister Ingeborg was more like a boxer limbering up before a fight. Perhaps she really was related to Max Schmeling.
   Charly cleared her throat before beginning.‘Can I call you Hannah?’ As Charly expected, Hannah Singer gave no response. She needed to be patient, see how the girl reacted. ‘A man died,’ she continued. ‘We think you knew him and that you can help us.’
   She pushed the photograph of Heinrich Wosniak across the table. It had been taken at the morgue after the corpse had been washed. The lack of blood made it just about bearable to look at. The worst thing was the burns, but Charly couldn’t spare the girl those.
   Hannah’s dark brown eyes remained fixed on the ground.
   ‘Don’t you want to look?’ No reaction. ‘Heinrich Wosniak.’
   The eyes flitted briefly to the photo and back. Then to the photo again, disbelieving.
   ‘Do you recognise him? He survived the fire.’ Hannah’s gaze had returned to the floor. ‘And now he’s been killed, on the street.’ Silence. ‘They’re nearly all dead now. The men who stayed on Bülowplatz, in the Crow’s Nest.’Crow’s Nest was the name given to the wooden shack by its residents, the Crows, a band of beggars and wastrels.‘Now there are only two left. Gerhard Krumbiegel and you.’
   A wrinkle appeared on the bridge of Hannah’s nose.
   ‘Do you know where we can find Krumbiegel?’
   Hannah’s face gave little away, but the name Krumbiegel might have triggered something. The second survivor of the fire hadn’t had a fixed address in years. CID were only able to question him and Heinrich Wosniak when they were laid up in hospital in the immediate aftermath of the blaze. There was nogetting hold of him now. They didn’t even know if he was still in Berlin, and they didn’t have a photo either.
   ‘Perhapshe can tell us something about Wosniak, if you don’t want to.’ Silence. ‘You were one of the Crows, weren’t you?’
   Hannah’s eyes flashed with suppressed rage and protest, though against what, Charly couldn’t say.
   ‘You weren’t?’ Charly tried to catch the girl’s eye, succeeding for a brief moment. ‘But you lived with them. With your father.’ It was gone, Hannah’s gaze returned to the floor. ‘They didn’t treat you well, did they, the Crows? You had to beg for them…’ Silence. ‘Together with your father…’
   Charly paused here, too. She didn’t want to insist, or put the girl under too much pressure, but provoking a reaction or two gave her hope. Hannah certainly wasn’t deaf.
   ‘Why did you start the fire? Did you really mean tokill the men? Or did you just want to give them a fright? Before it all went so terribly wrong…’ Charly opened the envelope in the patient file. ‘Your father died in the blaze. You can’t have wanted that. Tell me why you did it.’ She took the photo of Heinz Singer and pushed it across the table to lie alongside that of Heinrich Wosniak. ‘Or perhaps it’s precisely what you wanted? To…deliver him from his pain – because you couldn’t bear to see him that way?’
   For the second time, Hannah lifted her face, staring at the wall, the ceiling, the tabletop and the vase of flowers, but never at the three other women in the room. Again and again her gaze returned to the photo on the table and the image of the dapper soldier until, finally, it rested there.
   Charly thought she saw her trembling slightly, almost imperceptibly, like trees quivering in a breeze, until two dark-green blotches appeared on the pale green of her nightshirt and grew steadily larger. Tears. Hannah Singer was crying silently, releasing everything that had built up in the last fourteen months, and her trembling became more pronounced. Concealed within that tiny body it seemed there lay an unsuspected strength which was now ready to explode.
   All at once, so suddenly that no one in the room was prepared for it, Hannah’s hand shot forward, grabbed the photo of her father and pressed it to her chest.
   ‘Is that your picture?’ Charly asked.
   ‘It was recovered from her father’s possessions,’ the sister said.
   ‘So it does belong to her.’
   ‘You’ve read the file, haven’t you? This little wretch torched her own father alive. Do you think she deserves a photograph of him?’ She planted herself in front of Hannah. ‘Give it back,’ she said. ‘This instant! It’s not yours.’ The girl cowered on the chair. ‘Let go, give it back!’
   Before Charly could say anything or intervene, Charge Sister Ingeborg grabbed Hannah’s right hand and tried to prise the photo out of it.
   Hannah folded her body inwards and pressed the image tighter against her chest.
   For God’s sake let the girl go, Charly was about to say, but suddenly there came a cry so shrill that she had to cover her ears. Hannah was screaming at the furious charge sister, screaming right into her ear, as she scratched the fingernails of her left hand across her face.
   Charge Sister Ingeborg touched her bloodied features and, before any of them could move, Hannah was on her feet and running as if her life depended on it. Just before she reached the door, Charge Sister Ingeborg sounded her whistle, ran two or three steps and dived like a goalkeeper saving a penalty, bringing the fragile girl flailing to the floor.
   Charly stood up, unsure what to do. She ought to have helped bring the fugitive under control, but her instincts told her to tear Charge Sister Ingeborg away, to help Hannah. Suddenly, the door flew open and two men in white uniforms swooped on the screaming girl. One pressed Hannah’s arms behind her back while the other threw his weight on her flailing legs. Charge Sister Ingeborg plucked the photo out of her hand.
   The wartime image of Heinz Singer was badly creased but still intact. Charge Sister Ingeborg lifted it like a trophy before placing it back inside the envelope.
   The two men secured poor Hannah Singer in a straitjacket, apparently enjoying themselves, and dragged her from the room. Hannah would most likely be placed in a padded cell, or whatever they did with obstreperous prisoners, Charly didn’t like to think about it.
   She couldn’t be sure, but for some reason she couldn’t help thinking that Charge Sister Ingeborg had been waiting for a chance to show this disturbed girl who was in charge. As for the police, who had dared disturb the tried and tested routine of the Wittenauer Sanatorium… Perhaps ‘insane asylum’was the more appropriate term.
   ‘I fear your interview is over,’ Sister Ingeborg said. ‘I did say you wouldn’t get anything out of her.’ Her gaze said more still: if you hadn’t come here none of this would have happened. Why did you have to get the poor child so worked up?
   ‘What… what will happen to her now?’ Charly asked.
   ‘First she needs to be sedated. After that the ward doctor will decide.’
   No doubt she hoped the ward doctor would plump for the most painful treatment he could find.
   7
   From the back of the town hall balcony, Rath looked over the heads of Cologne’s ruling class, seeing little but the gable end of the building opposite. He felt he didn’t belong, but neither would he wish to, unlike his father who had already moved two rows forward.
   Still, not even Engelbert Rath could get next to Konrad Adenauer, who stood at the railing looking down on the Alter Markt and the crowd assembled for the Rosenmontag parade. That place of honour was reserved for the so-called Dreigestirn, the mad triad of virgin, peasant and prince.
   Prince Franz’s long peacock feathers bobbed in time with the music as he thanked Adenauer for allowing the parade to be staged in this economic climate. When the voice of Willi Ostermann rasped inevitably from the loudspeaker, the tightly packed crowd linked arms and swayed from side to side, leaving Rath nochoice but to join in. He had nothing against Carnival, only those for whom the event was an extended exercise in mutual back scratching. To his left a garishly made-up woman with yellow straw plaits, a red-and-white patterned blouse and blue dress; to his right a man with oversleeves who looked asif he’d prefer to link arms with Rath’s buxom neighbour.
   No, his place was with Paul and their old friends by the cathedral.
   It was time for the parade; the prince’s chariot awaited. Men in black suits and fool’s caps escorted prince, virgin and peasant into a room behind the balcony. Rath mumbled an apology and joined them. After descending a set of stairs they found themselves on the Alter Markt, where the triad was given a warm welcome. There was still time to join Paul and the others, perhaps even to get rid of the stupid fool’s cap given to him by his father, and find a proper disguise.
   ‘What are you supposed to be? A short-sighted Jew?’ Engelbert had asked as they were getting ready in Klettenberg. After a brief set-to, Rath had returned the rubber nose to his coat pocket and reluctantly donned the fool’s cap.
   Floats were lined up on the Alter Markt, but it was apparent that money was scarce. None was higher than three metres, none ostentatious, and the whole thing felt as if it had been cobbled together at the last minute – which it more or less had.Carnival of yore, the slogan ran, but there was nothing historical about it. More as if the people were recalling a time when the Cologne Carnival was run by them and not the city’s festival committee.
   Rath pushed close to the balcony and looked up. Konrad Adenauer stood impassively by the railing, and for a brief moment their eyes met. Rath wasn’t sure if Adenauer recognised him, but felt caught out and looked away. He hoped his father hadn’t seen him make his escape.
   The parade began to cries of‘Alaaf’ and children squealed for presents and sweets from the floats until a different, harsher, set of cries cut through the joy. A dozen brownshirts, forcing their way through the crowd towards the town hall, looked serious, out to provoke. The cries of ‘Alaaf’ fell to a series of whispers.
   ‘Adenauer an die Mauer!’ Adenauer for the firing squad. At first Rath thought he had misheard, but the brownshirts shouted again.‘Adenauer an die Mauer!’
   Adenauer was inscrutable, as ever. He pretended not to hear them, as if their language were not the language of his generation; as if it were beneath his dignity to respond. Engelbert Rath was near him now, looking nervous. Two uniformed cops accepted the kisses of girls in fancy dress, but otherwise followed the mayor’s lead, seemingly oblivious to what was going on.
   Revellers began to look intimidated and parents shielded their children. No one condoned this, but no one dared react.
   Rath was no great believer in Adenauer, but would not stand by and watch. Before he could cut in, however, men in the red uniforms of the Cologne Carnival Association encircled the brownshirts.The Rote Funken. The Red Sparks. There was a brief and intense exchange and the SA men left to the jeers of the crowd.
   ‘Three cheers for the Carnival Association. Kölle…!’
   ‘Alaaf!’ the crowd responded.
   Rath looked up at the balcony. It was the Carnival stick-in-the-mud Adenauer who had initiated the chant.
   ‘The police have it good here,’ Rath said to one of the cops. ‘You have the Rote Funken as auxiliary officers. In Berlin it’s left to the SA and Stahlhelm.’
   ‘What do you want, man?’
   ‘What do you want,Inspector,’ Rath said, flashing his identification. ‘CID, Berlin.’
   ‘Enjoy yourself, Sir.’
   ‘You too,’ Rath replied, without meaning it.
   8
   Wrapped in a blanket against the cold February night, Berthold Weinert sat in his attic room on Schumannstrasse, staring at a blank page in his typewriter. He spent all his free time on his manuscript, and right now he had plenty to spare. Many of his stories weren’t picked up, and when they were the news desks paid less than before. Forced to give up his furnished room in Charlottenburg, he had moved into this shabby garret around mid-summer, not anticipating how cold it would get in winter. Times were hard.
   His novel, started about a year ago after completing his never-to-be-filmed screenplay and his middling though nevertheless published account of theGraf Zeppelin, was a way of pretending to himself and his landlady that he was gainfully employed. The stupid thing was, of course, that there was no money in novel-writing, and no publisher would give him an advance.
   Hearing fire brigade sirens, he reached for the telephone. The fire station was on Linienstrasse, just by Oranienburger Tor, barely a kilometre from his apartment. By their sound, the first tenders must be approaching Karlstrasse.
   ‘Hello, Siggi! Berthold here. What’s going on? Where…?’
   Weinert quickly packed his notepad and pencil, reached for hat, coat, scarf, and gloves and ran into the street. The question was not so much whether the story was big, but how big given the location. An icy wind almost knocked him from his bicycle on the Kronprinz Bridge, but in five minutes he reached Platz der Republik where the first fire engines stood in front of the Reichstag.
   He leaned his bike against a tree and looked around at firefighters rolling out hoses and cops holding people back, but no barrier yet. He plunged into the crowd, trying to establish the heart of the blaze. A burst of flame in a window near the main entrance… a ladder was on its way. Broken glass when a firefighter smashed a window with his axe. That must be the Reichstag restaurant. Had the fire broken out in the kitchen? In better times he had dined there with politicians.
   A fire in the Reichstag was worth an inside page at least. With luck, and if the firefighters didn’t extinguish the blaze too quickly, it might even yield a major story. He climbed the stairs to the ramp in front of the main entrance, moving quickly but calmly while trying to look official. He could pass for a CID arson investigator, thanks to what he knew from Gereon, his ex-neighbour. Herr Rath had gone a little quiet on the story front recently. Some people had it too good.
   Weinert’s gaze was drawn skywards, to the glass dome that crowned the massive building. Suddenly illuminated from inside, it was as if someone had switched on a giant light bulb. Firefighters and police officers stopped with him to look up, grimly fascinated, only to fall into an even more pronounced frenzy. More fire engines arrived, some of which were directed to the other sides of the building.
   News that the Reichstag was on fire spread quickly. Police officers cordoned off parts of the square as more pedestrians arrived. The dome shone so bright in the misty winter night; even the golden Victoria on the Victory Column reflected the flames, sending word across the city: the Reichstag is on fire! One by one the glass panes of the dome shattered in the heat.
   Weinert hoped his news colleagues would be late on the scene. Best if his story was exclusive!
   He hurried to the south wing, where firefighters leapt from their vehicles and rolled out hoses. The entrance was open. He strode determinedly past the abandoned porter’s lodge and climbed upstairs. All he had to do was follow the hoses.
   The smell of burning grew more intense. Pulling his scarf over his mouth and nose, he reached the hall where in recent years politicians had mostly debated in vain, since with Hindenburg’s blessing successive governments had done as they pleased. The frosted glass of the swing doors had shattered and a solid wall of flames burned on the other side. The enormous room consisted, in its entirety, of fire. A dim memory from his religious childhood told him that hell looked somethinglike this.
   The firefighters kept a respectful distance, hosing water through the doors and into the chamber, but still the heat intensified. Weinert gripped his hat and looked for something to hold onto. No one paid attention to him.
   Part of the wooden panelling collapsed, sending sparks upwards like an army of angry glowworms. Entering the chamber was impossible, but he had seen enough, and he had to sell his story before someone beat him to it.
   At the telephone booths near the southern entrance, he inserted a coin and asked to be put through to the Scherl-Verlag. He was on good terms with Hefner, the senior duty editor ofDer Tag and, besides, he paid the best rate. Once Hefner heard his story, the morning edition would need a major rewrite.
   ‘Weinert here. The Reichstag is on fire.’
   Hefner wasn’t surprised. ‘We’ve sent someone.’
   ‘Bet he isn’tinside the building though.’
   Hefner put him through to a typist, and Weinert dictated his story directly into the receiver. More firefighters entered the building, their frantic, almost shell-shocked faces helping him find the right note, but he was astonished at his own fluency. That’s how it was when reporter’s fever took hold, and the story was big enough all right… He could see himself back in the editor’s chair he had lost three years earlier.
   He was almost finished when a group of civilians entered, one of whom he recognised, a furious, fat man in a trenchcoat: President of the German Reichstag, Hermann Göring, recently appointed Reich minister without portfolio and commissar for the Prussian Interior Ministry.
   Göring’s eyes flashed and in three steps he was at the telephone booth, seizing Weinert by the collar and yanking him out. ‘What are you doing here, man?’ Weinert was too stunned to speak. Was this the Reichstag president or some American gangster? The receiver dangled on its cable. ‘Are you one of the Communists responsible?’
   ‘Let me go so I can show you my press identification.’
   Göring snorted with rage as Weinert searched his coat pockets.
   A member of Göring’s entourage lifted the receiver. ‘Hello,’ he said into the mouthpiece. ‘Who am I speaking to?’
   The typist had hung up, or simply didn’t answer. The man turned to Weinert. ‘Where’s this ID of yours? Give it here. Otherwise you’ll be spending the night at Alex.’ He sounded like a cop. What Weinert wouldn’t give for Gereon Rath to appear now from around the corner. He searched his pockets with both hands, growing more and more frantic.
   The cop fiddled with the receiver.‘Operator?’ he said, and Weinert was surprised at how friendly the man could sound when he wished. ‘Can you please confirm the recipient of the last call?’ Satisfied with the answer, he hung up and turned to Göring. ‘He was speaking with the Scherl-Verlag, Sir. What shall we do with him?’
   ‘Turf him out. The press has no business here.’
   ‘No need. I’m leaving of my own accord.’
   Only now did Weinert realise his knees were shaking, and he was sweating despite the cold. He didn’t like to think what might have happened if he had been speaking with the offices ofVorwärts, or, even worse, theRote Fahne. Or, for that matter, his former employer Mosse, a Jewish publishing house. At least the Scherl-Verlag was staunchly nationalist.
   9
   ‘I’ve got the car outside,’ Charly said, reaching for a cold glass of kümmel. She had only come to pick up the dog, but the Spenerstrasse flat still felt like home. Everything looked as before: the pile of books next to the sofa, the dance dress hanging over the chair, the studied untidinessthat gave the flat its sense of cosiness. The bottle of aquavit in the cooling basket by the window. She had been living with Gereon in Charlottenburg since August.
   She held out her glass for a refill.
   ‘I thought your car was outside,’ Greta said.
   ‘My bedroom’s next door.’ Greta hadn’t let out Charly’s old room. Financially there was no need as her parents sent money regularly. Her father was an engineer, her Swedish mother an actress in Stockholm. She had a permissive attitude to affairs of the heart but had never made any secret of her aversion to Gereon Rath, even less her aversion to marriage.
   It was true that Charly had spent the odd night here since moving in with Gereon, and sometimes asked herself where she would go if circumstances changed. So, she accepted a third glass. After a day like today she needed to let her hair down.
   Having completed their report on the failed interrogation at Dalldorf, Superintendent Wieking had insisted that she and Karin question a few girls who had been picked up by Warrants in Wedding, suspected of having something against Hitler’s looks. Charly pitied their falling into police clutches, knowing that Wieking wanted to make an example of them. If there had been any trace of paint on the girls, she’d have omitted it from the statements.
   Since Dalldorf she and Karin had switched roles. Now her colleague asked the questions while Charly silently made notes. There was no proof, but the episode had done nothing for her mood, since she’d promised Greta that she’d collect Kirie just after six. As she had done each day since Gereon left for Cologne.
   ‘Has she been out yet?’ Charly asked.
   ‘Not in the last three hours.’ Greta raised her eyebrows. ‘We were waiting for someone.’
   Five minutes later they were strolling down Calvinstrasse towards the Spree, past dirty snow at the side of the road, wind buffeting the trees as they crossed the river and walked along the path towards Bellevue Palace. Kirie sniffed at every streetlight but eventually relieved herself against a tree.
   ‘Are you going to tell me who ruined your day?’ Greta asked. ‘Karin van Almsick or Gereon Rath?’
   ‘What do you mean: Gereon?’ Greta could read her mind. ‘Gereon isn’t even in Berlin.’
   ‘Precisely. Has he been in touch?’
   ‘No.’
   ‘You see.’
   ‘He’s probably been trying. I haven’t been at home much in the last few days.’ Greta’s gaze said:You’re protecting him,even though he doesn’t deserve it.‘No.’ Charly sighed. ‘I take full responsibility for my mood. I’m just not a very good police officer.’
   ‘Uh-oh,’ Greta said, linking her arm in Charly’s. ‘Keep on like that and I suggest we turn straight around and finish that bottle. If we run out of Aquavit, there’s a tasty Cognac to follow.’
   ‘You realise that approach is straight from the Gereon Rath book of problem-solving?’
   Greta shrugged.‘So what?’
   Crossing the Luther Bridge, Charly gazed upon the goods station and the gurgling darkness of the Spree, and, not for the first time, was surprised at how the city seemed to set the night sky aglow. The‘Golden Else’ on top of the Victory Column towered over the dark treetops of the Tiergarten, shining like a torch. Yes, the golden figure of Victoria that soared fifty metres above Platz der Republik was actually flickering in the darkness… but the glow of the sky was irregular, glimmering now here, now there. ‘Something’s not right,’ she said.
   ‘Come again?’
   Charly recalled hearing fire brigade sirens as she stepped out of the car on Spenerstrasse. A common enough sound in Moabit, she had thought nothing of it.
   ‘What do you think it is?’
   ‘How should I know? The Kroll Opera House has gone bust, hasn’t it? Wouldn’t be the first time someone had started afresh with help from their insurance.’
   ‘Trust you to think of a crime…’
   ‘Professional hazard.’
   ‘It’s more likely someone’s testing out a new sign.’
   ‘It smells like burning to me.’ The glow was no neon sign! If she looked closely she could see naked flames reflected in the gold of the statue of Victoria.
   Without exchanging another word, the two friends stepped off the bridge. Their destination was no longer Moabit, but the source of the flames. Kirie followed begrudgingly when she realised they weren’t going home. Charly had to pull on the lead. It was Monday evening, just after ten.
   10
   Strapped to the metal frame of the bed, she deliberately kept herself awake. She was used to the ghastly cries of her fellow inmates. It had nothing to do with them; nothing to do with the night-time lullaby. It was a only matter of time before Scholtens appeared; after midnight – soon – when the checks were reduced to two-hourly intervals.
   The first time he assaulted her he hadn’t thought it necessary to keep her mouth shut or gag her, but taken her as she lay strapped to the bed. Knowing that no one would come, that her cries were only one part of Dalldorf’s nightly concert of horrors, he let her scream and her helplessness only aroused him further. Next time, when she refused to scream, he hit her until she started. He revelled in torturing her, but tonight she was ready, with the paperclip that had been attached to her father’s photograph in her mouth. By the time the warders overwhelmed her and Charge Sister Ingeborg had wrestled the photo from her hand, she had it. No one had seen a thing.
   Spitting it out and bending it open, she used it to prise open the clasp that secured the bed straps. It didn’t take long, and when she was certain no one was watching she fetched a glass shard from under the radiator. She had hidden the long, pointed piece of glass weeks before when she had broken a vase in the corridor, kicking a stray fragment under the bed in her room. When they loosened her restraints a day later it was still under the bed. She had wrapped its butt end in fabric and hidden it under the radiator.
   She didn’t know if it would keep Scholtens away in future, or provoke him and make things worse, but she did know this: tonight it would be him that screamed.
   There was no sign of him. She had fantasised her revenge so often and so vividly that she felt disappointment. At last she heard footsteps as the cries of inmates fell away.
   Her door had no handle on the inside, but she knew he was coming by the shadow in front of the little glass window. The door scraped open and a figure in white uniform squeezed in, but it wasn’t Scholtens. The man wedged a chair in the crack. No master key, so he couldn’t be one of the staff. She had an inkling of who… but then she knew. She knew before she heard his voice.
   ‘You’re awake. That’s good.’ She felt him looking at her, even if she couldn’t see his eyes. ‘Defenceless, too. Lucky me.’ Rummaging in his overalls he took out a long, sharp dagger. ‘See this? A single, well-directed thrust and the lights go out. That’s the cleanest way, but you don’t deserve a quick death.’
   Hannah clasped the glass shard she’d wanted to drive into Scholten’s arse.
   When the police officer had showed her the photo of the dead man, Hannah couldn’t make sense of it, realising only that Huckebein was back. Even so, she’d never have believed things could move so quickly.
   Huckebein. Peg Leg. With a single jerking motion, he pulled her pillow away and her head struck the mattress. For a moment she was afraid that the surprise manoeuvre might have revealed her unrestrained arms and legs, but Huckebein was concentrating on her eyes. The bastard was grinning. He held the pillow in both hands and pressed it hard against her face. Her mouth and nose were blocked, as if taped shut. She tried to think clearly, rearing so that the straps didn’t slip down. Her hand closed around the shard, gripping the fabric at the end. The first blow had to hit home, had to incapacitate him at least temporarily. She couldn’t just stab blindly. His back would be the best place, right in the middle of his back. Now!
   She thrust with the glass for all she was worth, heard him yelp, sensed the pressure on her face immediately recede. She pulled the shard out and drove it into his body again, only now rolling from the bed and running for the door.
   Huckebein held his thigh and hobbled after her, but lost his balance and fell to the ground.‘I’ll kill you, you bitch!’
   She pulled the door shut, trapping him inside with no handle to turn, and ran down the corridor. Let him pound at the door, let him rant; raving lunacy was normal here. He wouldn’t get out until the night team made their next inspection. Or when Scholtens came…
   She had to get out of this shitty madhouse first. She wasn’t crazy. A murderer, yes, but she wasn’t crazy. She had to go where they couldn’t touch her. Only, where? This was the secure wing and all she was wearing was an asylum nightgown, open at the sides. She pulled a pair of rubber boots from a cleaning cupboard over her bare feet and helped herself to three overalls from the hook.
   Behind her, in the half-darkness, a door crashed open.
   She pulled the door of the cleaning cupboard quietly shut, sure of only two things: Huckebein couldn’t find her here, and she had to get out of the building. If he had entered undetected, there must also be a way out. She listened. He was moving in her direction.
   She curled into a ball, groping in the dark for the glass shard, but she must have dropped it in her mad flight.
   11
   Rath found himself lying on the floor looking at a huge pair of black ears. Closing his eyes again he tried a second time, lifting his eyelids slowly and carefully – to see the same thing: a pair of oversized mouse’s ears on the dusty floor. They were made of cardboard with leather straps that could be buckled on. Under the sofa were the remains of a carnival outfit. Gradually it dawned on him what it was, and to whom it belonged: Mickey Mouse. One of apair. Two girls who had accompanied them to the bar on Eigelstein straight after the parade and then…
   On the walls stood shelves and cases of wine and, in front of the windowsill, a desk. He couldn’t see much outside save for a bare brick wall and a few shorn trees, but the view was familiar. The furnishings even more so. How many times had he sat here in the past? He tried to sit up, but the steam hammer in his head pounded so hard he had to stop. Next to the sofa was an open case of winewith wood shavings sticking out. He stood up, letting the thin woollen blanket that had covered him fall to the floor. At least he was wearing underwear. Had he fallen from the sofa or lain deliberately on the carpet? He couldn’t remember, but someone was snoring under a bedcover on the sofa. Blonde hair glistened in the daylight that filtered through the window into the room. He pushed an empty wine bottle across the floor with his foot. The bundle on the sofa sighed and turned over. One by one the memories returned.
   The Mickey Mouses had been standing in the shadow of the cathedral. After linking arms to sway to the music, they had wound up in a bar on Eigelstein that Rath didn’t know, but which Paul claimed was the best place to go after the parade. Mickey and Mickey needed no second invitation. One was blonde and the other brunette; the blonde had talked a lot and the brunette gave the occasional smile. But what a smile it was! Paul must have thought so too since at some point they made themselves scarce, leaving Gereon alone with the blonde.
   So, what now? she had asked, and he had shrugged and ordered another round of champagne. They clinked glasses and when he made no move to kiss her, she pushed the false nose and moustache onto his forehead and seized the initiative. He didn’t resist.
   A faithful soldier, without fear… The song was blaring from the loudspeaker as they left the bar. He led her through the night-time streets as if he had a destination in mind which, to his surprise, he did: Paul’s office on Sudermanstrasse, which he entered with the lockpick that Bruno Wolter had taught him how to use.
   What an arsehole! Breaking into his best friend’s wine store because he and some girl he’d picked up needed a place for the night. At least he’d had the good sense not to call on his parents. He squinted across at the make-up smeared face. She wasn’t bad looking, the type he always went for when he was drunk.
   His socks and shoes lay beside him, but he needed longer to find the rest. At first, all he could lay his hands on was her outfit: short red trousers with big black buttons, full length black knitted stockings and white gloves. With each item a new memory arrived. How he had taken off her trousers and stockings, and more besides – after opening one of Paul’s cases and helping himself to a bottle of red wine. God, he had been out of control! They had taken it in turns to swig from the bottle, kissing, pawing and stripping one another as they went. Her giggling hadn’t stopped him, even though giggling was something he really couldn’t stand.
   His trousers were under the sofa behind the black cardboard ears. His shirt was there too. Jacket and overcoat lay beneath the desk, which left only the fake moustache-and-glasses combo from Tietz. The sofa yawned softly and he turned around. Two bleary eyes squinted at him.
   ‘Good morning,’ he said.
   ‘You’re up early.’
   ‘I didn’t want to wake you.’ He couldn’t remember her name, and where was that goddamn false nose? He looked behind the desk and underneath the chair.
   ‘Looking for this?’ She pulled it out from beneath the cover. The wire rim was bent out of shape. He put it in his pocket. The girl seemed to find the whole business a good deal less embarrassing.
   He threw the black stockings and Mickey Mouse outfit onto the sofa.‘Get dressed,’ he said. ‘The cleaning lady will be here soon.’
   ‘No breakfast?’
   ‘Not here.’
   He turned his back, a slave to his Catholic upbringing and afraid he’d give the wrong impression if he got an erection.
   She looked around.‘Is this your office? Are you a wine merchant?’
   ‘Something like that.’
   When she was dressed, he led her through the store onto the road, letting the door click shut. Hilde, he remembered now,Wilde Hilde. Not even that had deterred him.
   It looked as if a bomb had gone off on Eigelstein. The street cleaners hadn’t cleared the paper, broken glass or other rubbish, let alone the less appetising deposits. He led her to a little cafe on the Hansaring.
   ‘Let me order,’ she said. ‘I know a good hangover cure.’
   ‘Who said anything about a hangover?’ Rath asked, making such a pained face that she laughed out loud before going to the counter, then the toilet.
   Rath lit an Overstolz and hoped in vain that she would slip out through the rear exit. By the timeWilde Hilde returned the waiter had set down two glasses of a brown, fizzy liquid.
   ‘What’s this?’ Rath asked. The smudged make-up was gone; Hilde had pencilled over her eyebrows and applied fresh lipstick, an ordinary civilian once more.
   ‘Try it.’ The drink was ice-cold, and tasted sweet as lemonade, only better. ‘So?’
   ‘It’s good,’ he said.
   ‘It’s calledAfri-Cola.’
   ‘Are they paying you for this?’
   ‘Something like that.’ She lit a cigarette. ‘I work at their offices.’
   ‘Where?’
   ‘Blumhoffer in Braunsfeld.’
   She smoked Juno, the same brand as Charly. He made his excuses and went to the toilet, running the cold tap and silently cursing his reflection. At least he recognised it: unshaven, hair tousled, dressed for carnival, otherwise presentable. No worse than most Cologners the day after Rosenmontag. He splashed cold water on his face and ran his hands through his hair. He felt better already; this Afri-Cola stuff seemed to work.
   Back in the cafe, he ordered two more Afri-Cola and sat with Hilde for a final cigarette. At some point she asked about the scar on his shoulder and he let her believe it was a relic from the war. After placing a five-mark note on the table, he gave her a kiss on the cheek.‘Sorry, but I have to…’
   ‘Will we see each other again?’
   He shrugged and went on his way.
   Outside, on the Ring, he made for the telephone booth by the tram stop on Platz der Republik, within sight of the Eigelstein gate, and called Paul. He let it ring for a long time, but no one picked up. You should have left a note, he thought, but it was too late now. He bought a ticket and the morning paper and climbed aboard the next tram. He had to go home to his parents, shower and put on fresh clothes. Then shoot himself.
   He boarded the number sixteen tram and opened the paper. It was one of LeClerk’s, the man who’d forced him out of Cologne four years ago.Assassin, the press had dubbed him for days and weeks,Officer Trigger-happy. Now Berlin was where he belonged, with Charly, not in Cologne. This city was drunk on itself; it could stick its ridiculous excesses. The headline jolted him instantly awake.
   Reichstag in Flammen. Holländischer Kommunist verhaftet. Reichstag in flames. Dutch Communist arrested.
   Was the Red Front finally hitting back at the Nazis? He leafed through the paper, reading everything he could find on the story, almost forgetting to change to the twenty-one at Barbarossaplatz. Most Cologners were busy dealing with the aftermath of Rosenmontag, and perhaps they were right. What did they care what these idiots in Berlin were up to? Communists, Nazis, it was all the same – even if the danger of civil war had never been greater than since the brownshirts installed their Chancellor. Did this, now, mark the start? Surely not; the Communists in Berlin were braggarts who favoured words over actions.
   Adenauer had said:Hitler should have been countered with force a year ago. It’s too late now. Was it really? Wasn’t there an election on Sunday? Germany had been transformed into a madhouse in the last two or three years, but Nazi support was on the wane. A little patience and normality would soon be restored.
   He alighted the tram on Luxemburger Strasse. The smell of roast meat wafted through the hall as Frieda opened the heavy front door. In the Rath household, lunch was taken at twelve thirty whether or not the world outside was coming to an end.
   ‘Herr Rath!’ The girl regarded him wide-eyed. ‘We’ve been looking for you everywhere.’
   12
   The corridors of the Wittenauer Sanatorium smelled of cabbage and bratwurst. Charly’s stomach rumbled as she hurried along the shiny corridor, trying her best to keep up with Charge Sister Ingeborg. After Böhm’s call she hadn’t hesitated, had dropped everything and headed back to Reinickendorf, alone this time.
   ‘You’re going back?’ Karin asked, wide-eyed. ‘Why?’
   ‘Because the girl we questioned yesterday escaped last night.’
   ‘So what? That’s up to Homicide to investigate.’
   That was true, but Charly wanted to know what had happened in Dalldorf.‘Hold the fort,’ she said. ‘I’ll be back in two hours.’
   On the way she had stopped by the Reichstag to see how it looked in daylight. The smell of burning still filled the air, and the kitsch glass dome was reduced to a sooty steel skeleton. She doubted whether the Communists were responsible for the arson, as the papers claimed, but hadn’t said anything at the office, revealing neither where she’d been last night, nor her reservations about the arsonist’s identity. Why should the Communists dredge up some Dutch comrade, then ask that he, of all people, set fire to Parliament? If they really wanted to go for the Nazis, why not hit the SASturmlokale found all over the city? Or the Reich Chancellery itself? Or, for that matter, the Interior Ministry, where Göring was doing his best to turn the Prussian Police into a political brute squad?
   Only two weeks earlier he had decreed that enemies of the state should be ruthlessly gunned down. In other words, the Communists. And Thälmann’s men were supposed to have set fire to the Reichstagnow, giving Göring the ideal pretext for even more stringent measures?
   Cui bono? Who stands to gain? Once the question was asked, there was only one answer: the one Greta had given instinctively when they passed the Kroll Opera House and realised what was happening.‘It was the Nazis.’
   Remembering brought tears to Charly’s eyes. The Reichstag had been the symbol of the German Republic but the Nazis called itSchwatzbude, talking shop. They had filled more and more seats in the place, until November last year when, for the first time, they’d lost votes, two million in all. Charly hoped the downward trend would continue on Sunday. At some point Germany must come to its senses.
   With the help of her CID identification, she and Greta had bypassed the police blockade with Kirie, spying Hitler himself from a distance as he arrived with Goebbels. The pair looked more like gangsters than statesmen. She hadn’t seen fattie Göring, but he had been there too according to Gereon’s journalist friend Berthold Weinert, whom they met at the southern entrance and accompanied to an automat. It had been a long night.
   Now Charge Sister Ingeborg was talking about the fire and, for a moment, Charly thought she was trying to pin the blame on Hannah Singer. That was impossible, however. At half past nine the girl had still been strapped to her bed. The last inspection had taken place at eleven, and the alarm raised at half past midnight.
   The door hung on its hinges; the glass of the viewing window was shattered, the bolt wrenched from its moorings. It looked like the work of a crazed gorilla, not a sixteen-year-old girl.
   ‘Here it is,’ Charge Sister Ingeborg said, regarding Charly with disdain.It’s your fault that brat broke out, her gaze told her,if you hadn’t shown up, we’d have been spared all this!
   ‘Thank you, Sister, that will be all.’
   The charge sister turned on her heels and clattered down the corridor.
   Charly almost stepped in the pool of blood on the floor. The trail led from the door to the bed, where a man was examining the buckles on the leather straps.‘The work of the great Houdini?’ she asked.
   ‘Charly!’ Reinhold Gräf said. ‘Did Böhm send you?’
   ‘Something like that.’
   ‘You’re starting to sound like Gereon Rath.’
   ‘Is that a compliment?’
   ‘You ought to know. You’re the one marrying him.’ Reinhold had put up with a lot down the years, but he and Gereon were still good friends. ‘The great Houdini indeed… At any rate the girl picked the lock. And then…’ He gestured towards the door. ‘Then she must have kicked in the door and taken the fire escape.’
   ‘You think Hannah Singer did this? Have you seen her? Hercules she is not.’
   ‘You wouldn’t believe what crazy people are capable of.’ Then he asked the same question as Böhm. ‘Why did she run? Do you think it could be linked to your interrogation?’
   ‘Looks that way. As if I frightened her, but I wouldn’t know how.’
   ‘Wosniak’s death?’
   ‘She hardly reacted to his photo, but I think she recognised him. Not that she said anything during the interrogation, just sat there. Until I showed her the image of her father. She flipped as soon as the sister tried to reclaim it.’
   ‘Sounds crazy, but that’s what she is, and an arsonist to boot.’
   ‘At least she can’t set fire to the Reichstag. How hard can it be to find a girl running around in a hospital nightshirt in winter?’
   ‘There are more dangerous arsonists out there.’ All of a sudden Gräf was serious. ‘The police are finally taking action against the Reds.’
   ‘You really think the Communists are responsible?’
   ‘Who else?’
   Charly didn’t say what she was thinking. ‘Perhaps this Dutchman they picked up is the crazy one.’
   ‘You shouldn’t play down the Communist threat. Germany’s future is at stake. We can’t just stand idly by and watch.’
   ‘You’re right,’ Charly said, knowing Reinhold had a different kind of political engagement in mind. Suddenly she felt sad; Reinhold had once been her favourite colleague. ‘Anyway, let’s get down to it, start looking for clues.’
   Gräf gave a sour smile. ‘The blood in the corridor had already been wiped by the time I arrived. I just about managed to prevent the cleaning lady from tackling the room.’
   ‘Cleaning is our national obsession.’
   ‘At least she could still tell me where it’d been.’
   ‘Let me guess: the trail led from Hannah’s room to the fire escape. I don’t understand.’
   ‘What don’t you understand?’
   ‘The tracks in the room.’ She gestured towards the bed and surrounding floor. ‘Why is there blood everywhere if she only injured herself on the door?’
   ‘Maybe she went back to pick something up.’
   Suddenly Charge Sister Ingeborg stood in the doorframe.‘Excuse me.’ The sister looked at Gräf, Charly being unworthy of her gaze. ‘But… we found something. The cleaning lady…’
   Moments later they stood in a small, windowless room which held bucket, broom, scrubbing brush and all kinds of cleaning agents, with a small, wiry woman in an overall.
   ‘This is Frau Blaschke,’ Charge Sister Ingeborg said. ‘Show the inspector what you found.’
   ‘Detective,’ Gräf corrected.
   The cleaning lady reached behind her back as if she were holding a surprise present. A bloody, oblong shard of glass. The butt end was bound with tape and looked like a knife handle.‘Herr Gräf…’
   ‘Detective Gräf,’ Charge Sister Ingeborg said.
   ‘Right. Detective Gräf says I should stop cleaning, so I take my things back. And then I find this here, on the floor.’ She pointed towards a dark corner near the door.
   Charly took the glass knife from her.‘Have you ever taken blood from Hannah Singer?’
   ‘Of course.’ Like Frau Blaschke, Charge Sister Ingeborg was confused that a female officer should be in charge.
   ‘Then you’ll know her blood group.’
   ‘It’s in the patient file.’
   ‘Then let’s get the knife to the lab so we can determine the blood group and compare it with the tracks on the floor. I bet they’re identical, and that they don’t match Hannah Singer’s.’
   Gräf nodded thoughtfully. He understood what Charly was getting at.
   ‘That’s… I don’t believe it!’ The cleaning lady stood at a hat and coat rail with two overalls on it, exactly the same as hers.
   ‘What is it, Frau Blaschke?’ Charge Sister Ingeborg asked.
   ‘I’ve only just realised, but… the overalls. Half of them are gone. They only came back from Laundry yesterday.’
   13
   They really had been looking for him everywhere. Rath didn’t find out why until after lunch, during which, apart from grace, not a word was spoken. Engelbert Rath said nothing over the soup, nothing over the meat course and nothing over dessert. His father was a master when it came to the silent treatment, instilling guilt feelings in Gereon from a young age. Somehow this silence and its accompanying gaze of disappointed indifference worked on him still. How, he wondered irritatedly, was it possible to see through a man yet remain so utterly in his thrall?
   Lunch over, he was called into the study, where in bygone days Engelbert Rath had presided over his children’s misdemeanours like almighty God. Even now it was clear he was brooding over his wayward third son. He skimmed through his papers, stacked them neatly together and shifted them around a huge desk.
   Rath still felt hungover, though his symptoms were mainly psychological. The shower had helped with the physical side, but his guilty conscience was harder to shift. At last his father broke the silence.‘You didn’t stay on the balcony for long yesterday.’
   Engelbert Rath didn’t come at you with questions, but statements and accusations.
   ‘I had an invite from Paul Wittkamp. Like I told you.’
   ‘You had an invite from the mayor too.’
   ‘I came, didn’t I?’
   ‘You disappeared after ten minutes.’
   ‘Half an hour. I didn’t ask to parade around with the big shots on the town hall balcony.’
   ‘Konrad and I were doing you a favour.’
   ‘Thank you.’
   ‘There’s no need for sarcasm. Are you one of those who refuse to acknowledge our mayor since the Nazis started agitating against him?’
   ‘He isn’t my mayor.’
   ‘You know what I mean. Are you avoiding him because it’s politically opportune?’
   ‘Political opportunism is more your domain. I already know how it feels to have your friends desert you overnight.’ Rath lit an Overstolz, knowing his father would hate it. ‘Konrad Adenauer isn’tmy friend. He’syours. Don’t take it out on me if your cabal is vanishing into thin air. You backed the wrong horse. The Centrists are out. You’d have been better off with the Nazis.’
   ‘I can’t believe I’m hearing this from my own son. Konrad Adenauer is my friend and, precisely because he is having a rough time politically, I took the opportunity to stand by his side. I’d have welcomed you being man enough to do the same.’
   ‘I wanted to enjoy Carnival, not play at politics.’
   ‘Politics happens whether you like it or not. We need to ensure it’s conducted by the right people.’
   ‘I’m a police officer.’
   Engelbert Rath slammed his fist against the paper on his desk.‘What do you think this is? The Reichstag on fire. Politics! As well as being a police investigation.’ He raised his eyebrows. ‘Berlin called. Several times.’
   ‘Police headquarters?’
   ‘Who else? Heinz Rühmann? Of course it was headquarters.’
   ‘They do realise yesterday was Rosenmontag?’
   ‘What does that matter? What matters is that someone wishes to speak to my son on police business, and no one has the faintest idea where he is.’
   ‘How about you? Doyou realise yesterday was Rosenmontag? No, of course not. You were too busy playing at politics. You didn’t celebrate Carnival. You just took the salute.’
   ‘The same clearly can’t be said of you.’
   ‘I had my fun. Thank you.’
   Engelbert Rath shook his head.‘Officials in your position need to be available. Even when they’re on holiday.’
   ‘Don’t get so worked up. I’ll call them back.’
   ‘You should have been in touch of your own accord. That’s what a dutiful police officer would have done. Where are you going?’
   Gereon had had enough.‘To make a telephone call.’
   ‘I haven’t finished. There was another call for you, a Herr Klefisch. Apparently he will be making a police statement after all.’
   Engelbert Rath waited for an explanation, but Gereon refused to oblige. He stubbed out his Overstolz and left without another word.
   14
   Charly returned later than anticipated, to find Karin van Almsick on the telephone looking overwhelmed.
   ‘I’ll pass you over now,’ she whispered, placing one hand over the mouthpiece. She must have exhausted all her good will on her voice as her face was decidedly less friendly. ‘That’s four hours I’ve been waiting for you!’
   ‘Sorry,’ Charly took the receiver from her colleague. ‘Ritter, G Division.’
   It was Gereon. Typical. Disappears for days, then calls at precisely the wrong time. She decided to keep things businesslike. Fortunately he wasn’t one for sweet nothings. ‘Are the Communists in revolt?’ he asked.
   She gazed out of the window, away from her nosy colleague. The sky was even greyer than yesterday.‘How nice of you to get in touch,’ she said.
   ‘I’ve tried God knows how many times in the last few days, both at Carmerstrasse and the office.’
   The call had taken an unwanted turn. She placed a hand over the mouthpiece and addressed Karin.‘Would you mind making us some tea?’
   Karin lifted two cups from the desk and marched out of the room. Charly waited until the door was closed.‘I was there.’
   ‘At the Reichstag? On duty?’
   ‘By chance. It certainly wasn’t a Communist revolt. There’s hardly a Communist here who dares venture out.’
   ‘Well, that’s something. About time that lot started taking cover.’
   ‘What do you know about politics? What is it you want? I can’t believe you’ve called to discuss the Reichstag fire.’
   ‘Yes and no. It’s just… they’ve ordered me back to Berlin. There’s a ban on leave.’
   ‘Because of the Reichstag fire?’ She might as well have said:because of the Communist witch-hunt, since that was clearly why the commissioner was pooling police resources. He wasn’t interested in an actual investigation.
   ‘My train gets in just after midnight,’ Gereon said.
   ‘Tonight?’
   ‘You saw it? The Reichstag, I mean.’
   ‘Greta and I happened to be passing. It was late and we had to take the dog out. That’s when we saw the flames.’
   ‘We had to take the dog out? You sound like an old married couple. You were in Moabit with Kirie?’
   ‘Greta looks after her while I’m at work. The poor thing has to go somewhere. Wieking’s forbidden me from bringing her here.’
   ‘Bergner’s perfectly happy looking after her.’
   ‘I can’t ask for the porter’s help every day.’
   ‘But you can ask Greta?’
   ‘She’s my friend, so yes, and she doesn’t complain when I’m late. Think of the money we’d be wasting on tips!’ Why, in God’s name, did she have to justify what she did with the dog? Who was it who’d left Kirie with her in the first place?
   ‘I thought Carmerstrasse was our home…’ said Gereon. ‘Sounds like I can count myself lucky if I see you tonight.’
   ‘You were saying about an old married couple?’
   ‘Need I remind you that we will be married soon?’
   ‘Remindme? Who’s the one gallivanting around Cologne while I’m stuck at home with Kirie? If I choose to spend the night at an old friend’s house because it’s late, then that’s my business, and my business alone!’
   Charly heard someone clearing their throat behind her and spun around.
   ‘If it’s your business alone, Fräulein Ritter, and I’m perfectly happy to concede that it is, why do you need to conduct it using a police telephone?’ Superintendent Friederike Wieking stood in the doorframe, gazing sternly, report file wedged under her arm.
   ‘Inspector Rath has instructions to return to Berlin and wanted to…’
   Superintendent Wieking wrenched the phone from her hand.‘Inspector Rath,’ she bellowed into the receiver. ‘If you have instructions to report to Berlin, then I suggest you do so. God knows we need every officer here to repel the Communist threat. Now, if you would kindly refrain from distracting my girls!’
   Charly longed to hear Gereon’s response, but couldn’t make it out.
   ‘Let me worry about that, Inspector,’ Wieking said pointedly, and hung up.
   Karin paused in the door holding two cups of tea. Her eyes flitted between Charly and her commanding officer, towards her work station and back.
   ‘Please come in, Fräulein van Almsick. What I’m about to discuss with Fräulein Ritter is no secret, especially seeing that you, too, are affected by her actions.’
   Karin set one cup on Charly’s desk and the other on her own. She sat down and opened a file. When her eyes finally met Charly’s she shrugged her shoulders as if to say:sorry,I didn’t mean to snitch. Charly didn’t believe her.
   ‘Were you at the Wittenauer Sanatorium this morning, Fräulein Ritter?’ Wieking began.
   ‘Yes, ma’am.’
   ‘I don’t recall sending you there a second time.’
   ‘Chief Inspector Böhm called and…’
   ‘I’ve spoken with Chief Inspector Böhm. He didn’t request a follow-up.’
   ‘What I was about to say was that Böhm called to inform me that Hannah Singer had escaped from the sanatorium, the girl I…’
   ‘And you saw this as an opportunity to sendyourself back to Reinickendorf? Leaving your colleague here in the lurch.’
   ‘I thought I could help.’
   ‘A commendable attitude, Cadet Ritter, but in future you should wait until someoneauthorised gives the order.’
   ‘Yes, ma’am. It’s just… I felt responsible somehow. The interrogation yesterday…’
   ‘…got out of hand. Yes I can see that. As for your report…’ Friederike Wieking threw the file onto Charly’s desk and tapped it with her finger. ‘You couldn’t call it a transcript. You mention glances, advance suspicions – but as for facts, as for a single meaningfulword, I can’t find anything.’
   ‘That’s because she didn’t say anything.’
   ‘Extracting a statement from a crazy Jewish brat was always going to be a fool’s errand. But I didn’t want to turn down Superintendent Gennat’s request…’
   So Böhm had engaged Gennat’s help, Charly thought.
   ‘If DCI Böhm gets fixated on something, that’s his business,’ Wieking continued. ‘What I can’t have is him commandeeringmy officers. Have I made myself clear?’
   ‘Yes, ma’am.’
   ‘Very well.’
   ‘Should I re-write the report?’
   ‘Leave it as it is.’ A smile spread across Superintendent Wieking’s face. ‘I don’t think Chief Inspector Böhm will be working on the case much longer.’
   ‘But…’
   ‘The report can wait. I’d rather you focused on the Red Rats. I wouldn’t be surprised if they had something to do with the Communist revolt. Graffiti like that, and days later the Reichstag’s on fire…’ Friederike Wieking waved her hand. ‘Well, I’m sure you and Fräulein van Almsick have it in hand.’
   ‘Thank you, ma’am,’ said Karin, who had interpreted the superintendent’s words as praise. Charly had never hated working in G Division under Friederike Wieking so much.
   ‘Then you know what to do,’ the superintendent said. Reaching the door, she turned around, lifted her right arm and issued a brisk ‘Heil Hitler!’ before departing.
   Charly and Karin exchanged surprised glances. Six months ago the superintendent would have risked disciplinary proceedings for the Hitler salute, which was still something she’d never have dared in Gennat’s presence. Party politics had no place at police headquarters, even if the Nazi leader was now Chancellor and his thugs working hard to destroy German democracy for good.
   For the time being, however, the German Reich remained a Republic, and, like so many others, Charly hoped the March elections would give its government something to think about. Democratically – or at least civically – minded Germans might still rise up and fight. They couldn’t let these barbarians run the country.
   15
   The fog had dispersed but it was still cold beneath the elevated railway, where a sharp wind was blowing. It was at least ten degrees cooler than Cologne. Rath had never been able to stand the Berlin winter. The city was too cold for a Rhinelander.
   Beggars gathered on the station steps. One man sat huddled on a piece of cardboard in a coat stiff with dirt, his hat on the pavement propping up a sign that said:War-blind, please give generously. Despite his white stick and pitch-black sunglasses, Rath felt that the man was staring at him. He rummaged for a ten pfennig piece and dropped it into the hat.
   A cop bobbed up and down on his bootheels, wringing his gloved hands to keep them warm. Pigeons cooed in the bridge struts. Rath went over and presented his identification.
   ‘Why don’t you see how things are coming along,’ Böhm had said, though Rath hadn’t known what awaited him at Nollendorfplatz until he got there. At the foot of a steel column were two wooden frames, each covered with canvas. The canvasses were splattered with pigeon droppings. According toBöhm they’d been here since the weekend, guarded by the Berlin Police as if they were the Hohenzollern crown jewels.
   Now Rath understood the cop’s disgruntled expression. It was all he could do to prevent his own mask from slipping. Had he really interrupted his carnival celebrations for this… shit?
   Yesterday on the phone it had sounded as if the successful capture of the Reichstag arsonists rested in Gereon Rath’s hands alone. All leave has been cancelled, Erika Voss informed him, every available man is to report for duty. Within hours he was on a train to Berlin without saying goodbye to Paul, let alone explaining the misappropriation of his office. Revellers might still be spilling out of the station,but to Rath it felt like Ash Wednesday. The fun was over, and it was time to head back.
   His late-night arrival at Bahnhof Zoo, on the platform where he and Charly had shared many a reunion and goodbye, was an anticlimax. She appeared bleary-eyed and absent-minded, while Rath’s delight was tempered by his guilty conscience. Conversation was no more than perfunctory on the journey home until, arriving at Carmerstrasse, they fell exhausted into bed.
   This morning any notion that he might be involved in the Reichstag investigation had been swiftly disabused. Although the fire remained the dominant theme at A Division briefing, Gennat had assigned him to Wilhelm Böhm. Unlike most of his colleagues, Böhm saw little point in hounding the city’s Communists and had already been deserted by Cadet Steinke, who had volunteered for the newly formed Reichstag task force.
   Rath lit a cigarette and examined the soiled canvasses, wondering if he shouldn’t follow Steinke’s lead when he got back, despite being sceptical about the general political madness: the Red threat had always been overstated in Berlin, and even now he couldn’t believe the Communists were on the brink of revolution.
   He took the photo Böhm had given him from his pocket: the corpse of a homeless man, his coat covered in rime and pigeon droppings. He compared the thickness of the shit with that of the two canvasses remaining from the original six.
   ‘I come bearing glad tidings,’ he said to the cop, who stood at a distance from the site. ‘Our work here is done.’
   The cop looked as if he had been given the all-clear following a lengthy illness.‘About bloody time. You wouldn’t believe how many people have stood here mugging me off.’
   ‘Oh, I think I would.’ Rath gestured towards the canvasses. ‘Do me one last favour. Get these loaded into my car. It’s parked over there.’
   The man was unenthusiastic, but obeyed all the same. Rath unlocked the car, opened the passenger door and the cop gradually lowered the two canvasses into the footwell, only for his blue sleeves to become smeared with pigeon dirt at the last minute.‘Shit!’ he cursed.
   ‘I should say so!’
   ‘It wouldn’t be so bad if the Prussians picked up the goddamn cleaning bill! Instead it will be left to my wife. Communist blood, vomit and pigeon muck. She’ll be delighted, I tell you.’
   ‘Lucky there’s Persil,’ Rath said, as the cop tipped his shako with a pained smile.
   Back at the Castle, Rath delivered the canvasses to Forensics.
   ‘What are we supposed to do with these?’ Klassen, one of Kronberg’s men, asked.
   ‘It’s to establish the chronology of…’
   ‘I know what it’s for,’ Klassen interrupted. ‘Right now we don’t have time. Anything to do with the Reichstag fire and the Communists has priority. The rest will have to wait.’
   ‘Perhaps the dead tramp was a Communist,’ Rath said. Klassen forced a smile. The pair had always got on well. ‘Come on! I’ve already compared them with the photos. All I need’s a quick look at the original coat and your signature, to make it official. I’ll write the report while you fetch it.’
   ‘Go on then,’ Klassen said. ‘But you’ll owe me.’
   ‘Of course.’
   Rath sat at the typewriter, inserted a Forensics report form and began to type. Moments later, Klassen returned with the old soldier’s coat, which dangled from a hanger as if it were about to be returned to its wardrobe. It smelled as though it hadn’t been washed since the war.
   ‘It’s more or less a match, wouldn’t you say?’ Rath asked.
   Klassen threw a glance at the canvasses, and at the dead man’s coat and nodded. ‘They’re both covered in about the same amount of shit, if that’s what you mean.’
   Rath shook his head.‘Which would suggest he was there four or five days before being discovered. Shocking. A man lies dead next to a busy train station for days, and the Berliners simply wash their hands.’
   ‘I fear it isn’t just Berliners,’ Klassen said, stamping Rath’s report and adding his signature.
   Rath waved the ink dry and put the report in his pocket.‘Much obliged.’
   ‘No trouble.’ Klaasen pointed towards the coat and canvasses, which were stinking out the warm office. ‘You going to take them with you?’
   ‘Me?’ Rath raised his hands. ‘Sorry, but that’s evidence. Nothing to do with me.’
   ‘You think I have any use for them now that the ‘examination’ is complete?’
   ‘Have them taken to the evidence room, or whatever it is you do. If in doubt ask Böhm. They’re no good to me.’

   Wilhelm Böhm was in a downright filthy mood. ‘Four days,’ he grumbled. ‘Which means that Wosniak was killed on Tuesday. Possibly Wednesday if his overcoat was already a little… stained prior to his death.’
   ‘The twenty-first or twenty-second then.’ Rath noted the date. ‘Shall we launch a press appeal? Check if anyone noticed any suspicious goings-on in the vicinity of Nollendorfplatz on either day?’
   ‘Could do,’ Böhm said, ‘but I fear the press already has wind of the case.’
   ‘It does?’
   ‘And it doesn’t look as if they’re in the mood to help.’ Böhm gestured towards a newspaper on his desk.Der Tag. Most of the articles still concerned the Reichstag fire and its aftermath, but one carried the headline:
   Police adopt questionable methods in hunt for killer
   Rath was astonished to see the name in the byline. Berthold Weinert, a former tenant of the widow Behnke’s, in Nürnberger Strasse.
   You wouldn’t credit it: while Berlin police detectives search for the masterminds behind the Reichstag fire (see pages 1, and 3–5 for further detail) a lone officer stands under the elevated railway at Nollendorfplatz guarding – wait for it – pigeon droppings!
   The attempt to determine the time of death of homeless man Heinrich Wosniak, whose corpse was discovered on Saturday morning beneath the steel framework of the railway station, has been going on for days.
   Homicide Detective Chief Inspector Böhm was unavailable for comment yesterday but must surely be wondering whether such tasteless not to say dubious methods can be justified at a time when police resources are urgently required to stave off the Communist…
   Böhm snatched away the article before Rath could finish reading. ‘You know this Weinert, don’t you?’
   ‘What are you trying to say?’
   ‘I’m just wondering where he gets his information.’
   ‘Not from me.’ What a pleasure to begenuinely outraged for once.‘You didn’t fill me in on the case until this morning. Though you’re right, I do know Weinert. Perhaps I should have a talk with him.’
   ‘I’m wondering whether that might not make matters worse.’ Böhm sounded wary. ‘At leastDer Tag’s the only one making fun of us,’ he said, flinging his copy into the wastepaper basket.
   ‘Don’t you think we should put out a request for information? Especially now we can isolate the time of death.’
   ‘Perhaps we won’t need the public’s help,’ Böhm said, gesturing towards a folder on his desk. ‘Just in from Pathology.’ He had a gift for making his colleagues feel surplus to requirements. ‘Dr Schwartz has examined the wound in Wosniak’s head more closely. The weapon wasn’t a knitting needle but a blade with a triangular cross-section.’
   ‘Like a skewer,’ Rath said, receiving an angry glance.
   ‘A kind of stiletto, but an unusual one. Dr Schwartz suspects it could be a trench dagger.’
   ‘There’s no shortage of those.’
   ‘True, but they differ greatly in style. Every front soldier had his preference. Anyway, it should help us identify the perpetrator.’
   ‘A soldier, like his victim.’
   ‘It’s highly likely. At the very least someone who knows a soldier.’
   ‘Or his way around a pawnshop.’
   ‘Unlikely. A front soldier wouldn’t part with his trench dagger.’
   ‘Why would an ex-soldier kill a homeless man?’
   ‘Because the homeless man was a soldier too. I’d wager that’s where we’ll find our motive. It could be score-settling from the old days.’
   ‘Or a fight between tramps,’ Rath said.Yet here we are.
   ‘The nature of the wound suggests this was no crime of passion. The man was stabbed through the nostril. It was a calculated act.’
   ‘Someone trained in close-combat?’
   ‘Could be. I’ve put in a request to the Reichswehr Ministry. We need to know exactly where Heinrich Wosniak served during the war, and with whom.’
   ‘That could be quite the list.’
   ‘Perhaps, but what is police work if not a search for a needle in a haystack?’
   ‘Hell of a job we have.’
   ‘Quite,’ Böhm said. ‘Which is why you’ll be delighted to hear that I’ve earmarked a special needle just for you.’
   ‘Come again?’
   ‘Not a needle exactly, but how about a trench dagger in a city of four million? One with a triangular blade. You need to find the manufacturer, and any potential owners.’ He handed Rath the report. ‘Measurements are in there: blade length, width and so on.’
   Rath’s face grew pale. ‘Will Gräf be assisting me in this Sisyphean task?’
   ‘Detective Gräf has his hands full with the city’s homeless shelters. We still haven’t found anyone who can identify Heinrich Wosniak.’
   ‘Nothing from the morgue?’
   ‘Nothing, and in three days they’ll have to remove him from the showroom. That’s when the deadline expires.’
   Rath gazed at the report in despair.‘How am I supposed to manage this alone? Can’t you give me anyone?’
   ‘What do you think? They’re all out hunting for Communists. Be glad there are three of us working the case.’ He looked at Rath. ‘You have a secretary, don’t you? Why don’t you see if she’s game, if you can’t manage on your own!’
   16
   Rath had cajoled two hours’ overtime out of Erika Voss, and now knew just about everything it was possible to know about trench daggers, despite never owning one as a youthful recruit.
   After finishing for the day he dropped her off in Wörther Strasse, and headed home in a funk. Police work could be such a drag. Stepping out of the lift in Carmerstrasse, he was greeted by the unfamiliar odour of hot food and remembered that he had skipped lunch. Kirie was even hungrier, pulling on her lead and sniffing everywhere as she dragged him to the front door. He removed her lead, and she pitter-pattered into the kitchen while he set down his bag and hung his hat and coat on the stand.
   ‘I’m home,’ he called. ‘Sorry for being late.’
   Charly appeared in the kitchen door, looking a little frantic, a stained white apron tied around her waist.‘There you are. I’ll get the potato dumplings on.’
   ‘You… cooked?’ Usually, if something warm landed on their plates, it was the work of their housekeeper, Lina, a young Silesian who came by twice a week. Most days they ate lunch in the canteen or at Aschinger, with a cold meal in the evenings.
   ‘Sauerbraten,’ Charly said. ‘Rhineland-style.’
   ‘What have I done to deserve this?’
   ‘Nothing. This is your welcome home meal.’
   She vanished inside the kitchen where Rath heard pans clattering and the sound of cursing. He made straight for the living room to put on a record, Ellington’sClouds in My Heart, and fetched the bottle of cognac from the cupboard. Just when he had poured himself a drink she reappeared.
   ‘Want one?’ he asked.
   ‘Maybe after dinner.’
   ‘I had a lousy day.’ Somehow he felt the need to justify himself. Since living with Charly he had seldom reached for the bottle, but after a day like today…
   ‘Catch many Communists?’
   ‘Not a single one. I’m one of the few who isn’t working for the Political Police. They put me with Böhm.’
   ‘So that’s why…’ she said, indicating the bottle.
   ‘Very funny.’
   ‘Paul called.’
   He looked at her in her ill-fitting apron and, all at once, realised how much he loved her. The pangs of conscience were intense. Wilde Hilde. The night in Paul’s office. ‘What did he want?’
   ‘The usual. To warn me off.’
   She was being ironic. Even so, he had to clear his throat.‘Some witness.’
   ‘Why don’t you call him back? I assume he didn’t just want to flirt with me, though I could be wrong.’
   Despite his guilty conscience, he felt a stab of jealousy. He waited for Charly to return to the kitchen before reaching for the telephone. No one home, so he tried Sudermanstrasse.
   ‘Wittkamp Wines.’
   ‘Chapeau, Herr Wittkamp. Working overtime so soon after your Carnival-induced coma?’
   ‘Ash Wednesday usually marks the end. Mind you, some don’t make it that far.’ Paul seemed annoyed. ‘When I opened my office again this morning it looked a little worse for wear.’
   ‘Sorry.’
   ‘And then my postbox… There wasn’t just business mail, but a letter from a certain Hildegard Sprenger. She writes that she’d like to see me again, the night we spent together was so wonderful. I’ll spare you the rest, shall I?’
   Pots and pans clattered in the kitchen. Kirie had been chased out and looked at him from where she lay in front of the radiogramophone.
   ‘I tried to call, but I was ordered back to Berlin.’
   ‘Your sense of duty knows no bounds.’
   ‘I’m sorry, I really am. I don’t know what got into me that night.’
   ‘I thought yougot into someone else?’
   ‘Fräulein Sprenger was one of the Mickey Mouses.’
   ‘You don’t have to explain. She was here just now, minus the ears.’
   ‘Come again?’
   ‘She stopped by the office. Seemed surprised to see me behind the desk. For a while she thought you were my partner, until I told her you didn’t sell wine.’
   ‘What else did you tell her?’
   ‘Not your name and address anyway.’
   ‘Thank you.’
   ‘You might have said you were spoken for! If notbefore your night of passion, then at the very least after it.’
   ‘There was no time. I never thought I’d see her again.’
   ‘Is that why you made yourself scarce on Tuesday night?’
   ‘I’ve told you already. I had to leave – on duty. You wouldn’t believe how many times I tried to call.’
   ‘Well, here I am.’
   ‘I owe you an explanation, but I can’t talk now. There’s no way Charly can hear of this and…’
   ‘That would top it all, wouldn’t it, if Charly got hurt? I’m your friend, Gereon, and there’s plenty I can ignore, but don’t ever treat her like this again! She doesn’t deserve it. And if you can’t manage that, then don’t marry her.’
   ‘You’re right.’
   ‘I’m serious! If you ever do anything like this again, you can consider our friendship over.’
   Rath couldn’t think of a worse threat.
   Charly poked her head around the door.‘I don’t want to interrupt, but dinner is ready.’
   He turned away as his eyes flooded with tears.Idiot, he thought.Feeling sorry for yourself, are you, because you’re such a prick? He cleared the lump in his throat before continuing.‘I’ll call you, Paul,’ he said, his voice still hoarse.
   Charly had laid the table as if for a formal dinner. Serviettes, wine glasses, knives and forks were set neatly alongside the plates. All that was missing was a lighted candle.
   ‘Charly, I love you,’ he said.
   She looked at him, and raised her eyebrows.‘And all it took was your favourite meal.’
   The beef cut easily and smelled as if Frieda had prepared it. Sadly it didn’t taste quite so good. Too sour, for Rhenish tastes, at least, and the seasoning was bland.
   ‘Good,’ he said, chewing contentedly.
   The dumplings and red cabbage weren’t bad at all.
   ‘More sauce?’
   ‘No thank you.’
   ‘It could do with a little salt,’ she said.
   ‘Now that you mention it.’
   ‘Any news on Hannah Singer?’
   ‘Pardon me?’
   ‘I thought you were working with Böhm?’
   ‘The crazy fugitive?’ He shook his head. ‘No, Warrants have bigger fish to fry. We have a new lead anyway, an old comrade. Someone Wosniak knew from the war.’
   ‘If Hannah had nothing to do with his death, then why did she scarper?’
   ‘Why do crazy people flee asylums? The same reason they catch flies and mistake their toothbrush for their dog.’
   ‘She isn’t crazy. She’s just… disturbed. I think they packed her off to Dalldorf because they couldn’t explain what she did. Perhaps she can’t either.’
   ‘Eight people on her conscience, and you’re telling me she can’t explain why? That’s pretty much the definition of insane.’
   A quarrel was brewing, but he didn’t want to spoil their reunion meal when she had gone to so much effort. It wasn’t Sauerbraten Rhineland style, but with a little salt it tasted just fine. He helped himself to more.
   ‘And now?’ he said, dabbing his mouth with a serviette. ‘Fancy a little dessert? I know just the thing…’
   She made a disappointed face.‘Sorry, Gereon, but I have to go.’
   ‘What? Where?’
   ‘I’m meeting Greta.’
   ‘So that’s it for our reunion, is it? I thought we could make an evening of it. Dance to old Ellington, finish the wine, and then… well… then I thought we couldreally celebrate.’
   ‘It sounds good. I just can’t.’
   ‘Why not?’
   ‘I’d rather stay here too, but I’ve promised Greta. You weren’t due back from Cologne until the day after tomorrow, and we wanted to have a girls’ night, like old times.’
   ‘Two women going out on their own? So you can, what? Make eyes at strange men?’
   ‘You’re not jealous?’
   ‘Of course not. But… we’re engaged! You should be going out withme. Especially on a night like this.’
   ‘Greta will scratch my eyes out.’
   ‘That I can believe.’
   ‘Gereon, I know the pair of you have never got on, but… she’s my best friend, and her friendship is very important to me.’
   ‘All right, it was a joke.’ He attempted a smile. ‘I don’t want to spoil your evening.’
   ‘We’re going to the cinema, then out dancing. Don’t worry, I won’t speak to any strange men. Unless, of course, they ask me to dance…’
   ‘Is this your way of saying I don’t take you often enough?’
   ‘Maybe.’
   ‘Then how about we celebrate my birthday on Sunday in style? Dinner followed by dancing in the Kakadu-Bar.’
   ‘Sounds good.’ She smiled and stood up. ‘But I really do have to go.’
   Rath put on a brave face, and a quarter of an hour later Charly stood ready at the door. She looked stunning.‘Should I drive you?’
   ‘I’ll take the S-Bahn. It goes almost door to door. We’ll get a taxi from Spenerstrasse.’
   ‘How about the way back? Are you planning to take the S-Bahn at night?’
   ‘Don’t worry, I’ll sleep at Greta’s.’
   ‘Come again?’
   ‘See you tomorrow morning. At the Castle.’
   Before he could say anything, she planted a kiss on his cheek and left. For a moment he thought about going after her, only to reconsider. He didn’t want to make a fool of himself.
   Was he jealous? Too damn right he was!
   Jealous of any man who danced with her tonight, even of Greta. She still hadn’t said anything about the Negro from Aschinger last year, not that he’d admitted seeing them together. Were they still in touch? He’d have liked nothing more than to go after her, to watch how she spent her evening, but he couldn’t. Not at any cost.
   ‘Well, old girl,’ he said to Kirie. ‘It’s just me and you tonight.’ He attached her lead and they set off on her evening walk. Perhaps he might take a little trip up the Ku’damm himself.
   17
   Sewage pipes and electric cables ran along the low ceiling, and water dripped periodically onto the concrete floor. Leo stood in a long corridor alongside a group of men he didn’t recognise. He didn’t know how long he’d been here, didn’t know if it was day or night, if he was still in Berlin or in the country somewhere.
   They had dragged him half conscious into the car and placed a stinking sack over his head. The drive had taken so long that blood from his head wounds had congealed against the coarse material. The wounds opened again when the sack was wrenched from his head and he blinked into the dim light of a 40-watt bulb.
   That was when he knew he’d be lucky to make it out alive. They weren’t finished with him, otherwise they’d have thrown him out of the car on the way over. At one point it looked as if they might. The burr of cars and traffic had grown suddenly louder as he felt the ice-cold air on his skin, but then the man about topush him out had held fast. By his comrades’ laughter, he knew they were only messing around.
   The men in uniform had come for him in the middle of the night, kicking down the door before he had a chance to open it. Seconds later they were in the bedroom. Vera had gazed first at him, then them, her world turned on its head. She had always known the cops might come knocking, but hadn’t reckoned on SA men in the white armbands of the auxiliary police grinning at her as she pulled the covers to her chin.
   Leo chose not to reach for the revolver in the drawer of his bedside table, but when their leader made a suggestive remark, he couldn’t hold his tongue and paid for it with a heavy blow. He spat out blood and teeth and heeded their command to get dressed. As he struggled with his trousers, the leader hit him again with his rubber truncheon, on the knuckles this time. The four undernourished-looking dwarves that made up the rest of the troop hounded him out of the bedroom. Taking him by the arms, they hauled him downstairs and threw him onto the rear seat of a car waiting outside. A different SA man pulled the sack over his head before administering a third truncheon blow.
   When he came round, head still ringing, he couldn’t see anything and his breathing was hampered by the stinking linen fabric. His hands were tied behind his back, but he wasn’t gagged. He knew they were driving, but not where. The men around him said nothing. Realising he was conscious again, they had played their trick with the car door, butotherwise left him in peace until they reached their destination and the fun started again. He thought it was another joke, but this time they really did throw him out.
   He heard the crunch of tyres stopping on gravel. There must have been others waiting. Taking him by the feet they hauled him across the courtyard and down a flight of stairs. He didn’t want to know how many bruises he’d suffered, but experience from the war told him he wouldn’t feel them until tomorrow. If, that is, they let him live that long.
   Another drip of water.
   He hadn’t the slightest idea how long he had been down here with the others, hands on trouser seams, standing in line like carrots waiting for harvest. Stand up straight was the command, and no one dared move or lean against the damp, whitewashed wall. The first to give in was beaten for so long he was little more than a bloody clump when his three assailants dragged him out. When another poor soul could no longer hold his bladder, they forced him to lick up his own piss, and laughed when he vomited. Then they beat him to a pulp too.
   Leo was damned if he was going to move. He didn’t need the loo, thank God, and was used to standing for hours. No, he wouldn’t give these bastards any excuse. People were screaming in pain, shrill and full of despair. He had seen people suffer and die before, but this waiting, this uncertainty, was wearing him down so much he wondered if itwouldn’t be better to get himself beaten to death and have the whole thing over with. The temptation to step forward and give one of these brown scumbags a little something to think about grew with every minute. Perhaps they would shoot him, the kind of quick and painless death he’d always wished for.
   There was movement in the stairwell, the steel door at the end of the corridor opened and a uniformed officer with a file under his arm emerged.‘Juretzka, Leopold!’
   Leo’s voice failed him at first, but at length he rasped a ‘Here’.
   The SA man planted himself in front of him and rammed a rubber truncheon into his gut. Leo doubled up with pain.
   ‘Answer loud and clear when I address you,’ the Nazi said. ‘Stand up straight.’
   Leo stood up straight and yelled:‘Here!’
   ‘Now come with me, shit-heap.’
   He was surprised not to be struck again but the man with the file simply pushed him along the corridor and up the stairs. It must have been dark outside. He couldn’t see any daylight. A fierce kick to the back, and he landed in a room lit only by a desk lamp, but managed to cling to a chair in front of a desk. Pools of blood were thickening on the floor. Blood glistened on the seating surface.
   ‘Prisoner Juretzka,’ File Man announced.
   The man behind the desk was the highest ranking. He was writing something on a kind of report form, almost as if he were a real cop, but Leo realised he was playing at the role, perhaps to make himself feel more important. Behind him stood another, whose face was untouched by the cone of light shining from the desk lamp.
   Despite the brown uniform and shorn hair, Leo recognised this third man immediately, having seen him often enough outside the door ofNeunundsechzig, looking strangely out of place in evening dress. No doubt get-up like that wasde rigueur for bouncers employed by the most infamous, and therefore most profitable, Nordpiraten-run illegal nightclub in the city. Müllerstrasse, in a rear courtyard basement of house number69.
   ‘Hello, Katsche,’ Leo said. ‘Nice uniform.’
   The man with the file pressed Leo onto the bloody surface of the chair and closed the door.
   ‘I didn’t realise the SA worked with criminals,’ Leo said. ‘Has Katsche here told you who else he runs with? Ever heard of the Nordpiraten?’
   ‘Keep your mouth shut,’ File Man said. ‘Comrade Kaczmarek will deal with you soon enough.’
   Right on cue, Katsche emerged from the darkened corner, took up position next to Leo’s chair, and dealt him a blow to the liver. Leo doubled up in pain. He ought to have known what Katsche’s role was. The man was a bouncer. He knew how to strike where it hurt.
   ‘Am I being held by the Pirates or the SA?’ Leo asked, receiving another blow to the knuckles for his troubles.
   The man behind the desk set his report form to one side.‘You, scum, are in the hands of the German police.’ He planted himself in front of Leo. ‘And you’ll speak when you’re spoken too. Understood?’
   ‘Sarge.’ Leo said through gritted teeth. ‘I just didn’t recognise your new uniform. Didn’t it use to be blue?’
   Another blow, to the ribs this time.
   ‘That’s Herr Scharführer to you, you piece of shit.’
   ‘Yes, Sir.’
   ‘Yes, what?’
   ‘Yes, Herr Scharführer, Sir.’
   The Scharführer looked satisfied. Typical German, Leo thought, always crowing about his rank.
   ‘Might I ask what it is you want from me, Herr Scharführer? I’ve nothing to do with the Reichstag fire, and I’m no Red either. Just ask Katsch… I mean SA-officer Kaczmarek.’
   Katsche struck him a blow to the solar plexus. He gagged and Katsche seized him and pulled him up by the collar.‘See that you don’t puke over the floor,’ he said. ‘Otherwise you’ll be licking it up yourself. You Red swine.’
   Red swine? Leo was surprised. Surely Katsche knew better. Had he denounced him as a Communist to his new comrades? To settle old scores?
   Katsche let him flop back onto the chair.
   ‘We ask the questions here,’ said the Scharführer. ‘All we want from you is answers. Understood?’
   Leo nodded. Why give these arseholes any more excuses? It would soon be clear enough that he was no Communist, in which case they’d have to let him go. Then, if he really had denounced him, Katsche would be the one in trouble. That was something at least.
   18
   Rath wakened at a quarter past four following a restless sleep. After tossing and turning for fifteen minutes he went into the kitchen to put on some coffee. He took a long shower and emerged feeling half-awake. The central heating, which ensured the supply of hot water was constant, was one of the advantages of his newly-built apartment in Charlottenburg. How he had hated having to switch on the water heater on cold winter days in his old place in Kreuzberg.
   In the kitchen Kirie looked at him out of drowsy eyes, and Rath ran his hands affectionately through her black fur. Despite another late night, he didn’t feel too hungover, but perhaps the headache was still to come. Finishing his coffee, he saw that it wasn’t yet five. Kirie looked bewildered as he attached her lead and shooed her outside. The night porter greeted him with the same blank gaze as always, only Rath was more familiar with it onhis wayin. He had never left the house so early before.
   Reaching the small park at Steinplatz, he was the only person for miles around. At other times of day it wasn’t unusual to run into fellow dog-walker Bernhard Weiss, who lived here with his wife and daughter, having been evicted from his official residence in Charlottenburg last summer when the Reich government made a purge of the Berlin police executive. It was a shame: in Police Commissioner Grzesinski and his deputy, two capable men had been lost. These days Rath felt slightly embarrassed at seeing him, unsure whether to regard him as his ex-boss or a new neighbour.
   Charly had no such qualms, chatting as if they were old school friends… but now he was thinking about her again. It didn’t matter what else was going on in his head, at some point his thoughts turned to Charly. Even this stupid murder case linked back to her, or at leastshe thought it did. This crazy girl wandering the streets of Berlin like a ghost. It was only a matter of time before Warrants picked her up.
   Once Kirie had completed her business he shunted her into the car and started the engine and drove aimlessly through the city, only to wind up in Moabit. To his left he saw the prison, the yard of which was brightly lit even at night, and the long, dark brick wall. To his right was Spenerstrasse. He switched on the indicator to turn, but pulled over at the last minute.
   What’s the plan here? he asked himself. Ring on Greta’s door and offer Charly a lift to Alex? A crazy idea, they’ll almost certainly still be asleep. You’ll only make a fool of yourself.
   He drove on through the city, past the burned-out Reichstag whose silhouette rose dark against the brightening eastern sky. Apart from the shattered, warped glass dome, the building looked exactly as before. You could be forgiven for thinking nothing had happened.
   He tried to focus on something else, to look forward to the coming day, to seeing Charly, at the latest in the canteen, and greeting his colleagues. All at once he knew where he could go. They could discuss the case, perhaps even arrange to meet for a beer later in theNasse Dreieck, just like old times.
   Parking on Luisenufer, he felt better. It was still very early, but if Gräf was planning to take the bus to Alex, as he did every morning, then he would certainly be up. At worst, he’d be having his breakfast. Rath and Kirie crossed the empty courtyard and made for the rear building. At just after six, there was no one in the stairwell. Reaching the door on the firstfloor, he debated whether he should permit himself the obligatory greeting, before giving a loud knock and crying: ‘Police! Open at once!’
   Moments later the door opened a crack and Reinhold Gräf, in a dressing gown and with his hair still wet, peered out, white as a ghost. ‘Gereon, for the love of God. What’s going on?’
   ‘Nothing much. Just thought I’d pick you up for a change.’
   Gräf looked at the clock on the wall. ‘You do realise what time it is? I haven’t had breakfast yet.’
   ‘No problem. Why don’t I join you?’
   Gräf made no move to let him in. The door was open no more than a crack, but for Kirie that was enough. Rath had noticed her growing impatient on the stairs, pulling on the lead as she sniffed out the flat where she’d spent the first years of her life. Or perhaps it was the liver sausage, but either way she broke off from her lead and charged inside.
   ‘Bad dog!’ Rath cried. ‘To heel!’
   Kirie never paid much attention to such commands. Rushing after her, Gräf and Rath found her in the kitchen, in the corner she used to call her own. It was a year now since Rath had passed on his old Luisenufer flat to Gräf, in favour of his apartment on Carmerstrasse, which was not only bigger but twice as expensive.
   Rath crouched and threatened Kirie with his index finger.‘You should be ashamed,’ he said, and Kirie closed her eyes, less out of shame, Rath suspected, than the need to catch up on sleep. He shrugged. ‘Well, now that we’re inside, I might as well take a coffee. No rush. There’s plenty of time.’
   Gräf gave a pained smile and filled the kettle. ‘How about you see to that while I get ready?’ he said, placing the kettle on the stove. ‘You know where everything is.’
   Rath went to the cupboard and fetched the coffee grinder. The kitchen door was still open, and he could see the stand in the hall outside. He hesitated. No, he wasn’t imagining things. An SA uniform hung from one of the hooks. He continued as if nothing was wrong. ‘Any joy yesterday?’
   ‘Come again?’
   ‘In the homeless shelters.’
   ‘Nothing. No trace of Heinrich Wosniak anywhere. I’ve scoured all the relevant addresses around Bülow and Nollendorfplatz, but there’s no one who knew him.’
   ‘A man fights for his country, and ten years later the whole world’s forgotten about him.’
   ‘There are thousands of them.’
   Rath was about to ask about the brown uniform when the bathroom door opened and a man emerged, towel wrapped around his hips, blond hair still wet but perfectly parted, and marched straight into the kitchen. Rath had heard the water running as Kirie charged inside, but thought nothing of it.
   Seeing Rath, the blond man stopped in his tracks.
   Gräf was visibly uncomfortable. ‘This is Conrad. I mean, Herr Kötter,’ he said. ‘He lives upstairs in the attic room, where that Countess used…’ He cleared his throat. ‘Anyway, Herr Kötter has no running water, which is why…’
   ‘Burst pipe,’ the blond man said to Rath, but it sounded like: ‘Wanna’ fight?’
   In the same instant Rath realised where he had seen him before. On several previous visits to Luisenufer he had run into an SA man in the courtyard who’d greeted him with a dirty look. He didn’t appear much friendlier now.
   ‘I’ll be off then,’ Herr Kötter said, removing his uniform from the hook. ‘Many thanks, neighbour.’
   ‘No trouble.’ Gräf smiled uneasily.
   No wonder, Rath thought. Imagine letting a Nazi do his morning toilet in your flat.
   Kötter slung his trousers and brown shirt over his arm, put on his uniform cap, and picked up his boots. It was strange seeing an SA officer clad in only a towel and peaked cap, but Rath sensed he’d be wise to suppress a grin. The SA wasn’t known for its sense of humour.
   ‘Just a moment,’ Gräf said and ran into the corridor. He took the swastika brassard from the hall stand and set it on top of the clothes pile on Kötter’s arm. They exchanged another glance, which Rath couldn’t explain, and the door clicked shut.
   Rath poured coffee beans into the grinder.‘Best get in with the new regime. Or did you just fancy seeing a Nazi in his pants?’
   Gräf ignored the quip. ‘I’ll get ready,’ he said, disappearing into the bedroom.
   Rath cranked the lever, considering the situation as the beans cracked. He knew that Reinhold harboured sympathies for the‘government of national concentration’, as Hitler’s cabinet termed itself.
   ‘At last things are looking up,’ Gräf had said back in January, when Hindenburg appointed his new Chancellor. In spite of Reinhold’s admiration for the brownshirts, Rath had hoped he wasn’t a true believer. No one who had kept their sense of humour could be and Reinhold had kept his – until now.
   They never really discussed politics when they met, nor did they speak about their private affairs. For a long time Rath hadn’t told Reinhold about Charly, partly out of concern that his colleague might have eyes for her too, but there had been no bad blood when he learned of their engagement and his congratulations had been genuine.
   Continuing to crank the lever, Rath’s gaze fell on the breakfast table. It was already laid for two: two coffee cups, two plates, two knives, even two egg cups. It must have looked like this before he and Kirie burst in. The table wasn’t laid for him, it was laid for… Blood rushed to his head. It couldn’t be true, or could it?
   Gräf returned to the kitchen, looking immaculate. Even his tie was done up.
   ‘Could I…,’ Rath said. ‘Would you mind if I used the bathroom?’ He paused. ‘Or do I have to join the SA first?’
   ‘Very funny.’
   Rath set down the coffee grinder knowing he had to get out of the room. Perhaps he was just imagining it. Perhaps Gräf had offered his neighbour a coffee, just as he had his commanding officer. If they really had been meaning to have breakfast together, the detective and his Nazi neighbour, it didn’t have to mean anything. Gräf was embarrassed, naturally, accurately sensing what Rath might say after burstinginto the flat. Still, being friends with a Nazi was nothing for a police officer to be ashamed of these days. A year ago the Politicals would have become involved and an internal investigation triggered. Now it was practically a badge of honour.
   Reaching Gräf’s bathroom, Rath saw something that rattled him even more, perhaps because the display of intimacy was precisely what his own bathroom lacked whenever Charly decamped to Greta’s. Reinhold Gräf’s bathroom looked as Gereon Rath’s ought to have looked, with two glasses on the shelf in front of the mirror, and in each glass a toothbrush.
   19
   The awakening city flitted past but all Reinhold Gräf could see was Gereon staring blankly through the windscreen. He had been silent since the flat, saying nothing in the face of what was obvious: nothing about Conny, who’d emerged from the bathroom freshly showered, nothing about the breakfast table, nothing about the idyll they shared like anold married couple. How could they have been so naive?
   Returning to the bedroom to get dressed – to dispose of Conny’s things and fix the crumpled sheets – Gräf had slammed his fist against the mattress in anger at his own stupidity.
   Why, oh why, had they chosen to play with fire like this? Conny usually crawled upstairs to his attic flat at the end of the evening, but in the last few weeks they had grown careless. Perhaps it was their euphoria at Germany’s change in fortune. Joy at the triumph of the nationalist movement was one of many things they had in common. Even so, they shouldn’t have forgotten that what they were doing was wrong and illegal.
   Someone like Gereon Rath, who had previously worked for Vice, wasn’t blind, and he certainly wasn’t stupid. There must be a reason for his silence, or was he simply over-tired? Was Gräf attaching meaning where there was none? Because he had felt caught from the moment Gereon appeared at his front door? Half an hour later and Conny would have been on his way to work.
   Ifs and buts… what was done was done.
   ‘Strausberger Strasse?’ Gereon asked.
   Gräf nodded, grateful for even the most banal of utterances. ‘Number seven, second rear building. Silesian Olga.’
   ‘Doesn’t sound very official.’
   ‘I’ve been round all the municipal shelters.’
   ‘So you’re going private?’
   ‘If you like.’
   Gereon stopped outside the house.‘See you at the Castle.’
   ‘Depends how I get on. I still have a few addresses to check. How about a beer tonight in the Dreieck?’
   ‘No can do. I have to look after Charly.’
   Gräf got out, let Kirie onto the passenger seat and tipped his hat. Gereon returned the gesture. No sooner had he closed the door than the Buick turned and headed back towards Frankfurter Allee. Through the reflection in the windscreen he tried to see whether Gereon was looking back, but all he could make out was Kirie’s silhouette.
   After crossing a miserable-looking courtyard, he descended the basement stairs to the second rear building and was assailed by the smells of mildew and male sweat. Olga Joppich lived in a flat almost completely devoid of light. It seemed scarcely credible that a dozen men could have slept here last night, but they had, and paid for the privilege.
   Places like this were plentiful in north and east Berlin. Miserable, damp, mouldy basements that poor souls like Olga Joppich rented to those who were even less fortunate, to avoid being put out on the streets themselves.
   Gräf fervently hoped that such conditions, imposed on Germany by the November criminals, would soon be a thing of the past. German soldiers who had sacrificed their health for the Fatherland now lived on the streets – that couldn’t be right. In the new Germany, they, too, would find their place. Sadly it was too late for Heinrich Wosniak, and many others who had spent their final years in penury. Men whom the Weimar ‘system’ had on its conscience.
   Reaching the door he followed the instructions on the yellowed sheet nailed to the jamb, and rang three times.
   20
   Rath still wasn’t quite with it as discussion turned to the latest rumblings in the press. The article inDer Tag had opened the floodgates for the rest. Gennat advocated going on the offensive, but Böhm was having none of it, so great was his distrust of ‘hack writers’. His experiences with the press hadn’t been universally positive, which no one knew better than Rath, who had been responsible for many of them. But what did Böhm, who avoided all contact with journalists, expect? Certainly Gennat was against such default negativity.
   While Buddha and Böhm argued, Rath’s thoughts turned to Luisenufer earlier that day. He still couldn’t believe it, but there was no other explanation. Reinhold Gräf was a pansy.
   How could he do this to him? After all the beers they had drunk together, everything they had been through? How often had they got changed after police sports? Stood under the shower together? Plenty of opportunity to look him up and down… Rath grew furious thinking about it.
   ‘…isn’t that so, Inspector Rath?’
   The voice belonged to Böhm, but everyone was looking at him.
   ‘Come again?’
   ‘The murder weapon. The trench dagger. My colleagues and I would like to know what progress you have made.’
   ‘Well, it’s tricky.’ Rath cleared his throat. ‘There is no such thing as a standardised trench dagger. Remember that trench warfare was something unknown, for which German soldiers were unprepared. For the most part, the men would have acquired their own daggers, whether by manufacturing them or adapting existing weapons. It wasn’t until the second year that infantrymen on the Western Front were provided with trench daggers, albeit there were still enormous regional differences.’
   ‘Fine, Inspector,’ Böhm interrupted. ‘But what does it mean for us?’
   ‘That we still have a long way to go. The only thing we can say with any certainty is that our murder weapon is unlikely to be standard army issue.’
   ‘A homemade job then?’
   ‘Or stolen from the enemy, that sort of thing happened too. Although a dagger with a triangular cross-section was rare, it wouldn’t have been the only one. For the time being I have concentrated our inquiries on Heinrich Wosniak’s unit, the First Guards Reserve Infantry Regiment. Perhaps we’ll learn more if we can track down one of his old comrades.’
   ‘Thank you, Inspector Rath,’ said Gennat. A ‘thank you’ from Böhm was unthinkable. ‘Given the degree of uncertainty, I think it would now be appropriate to appeal to the press for witnesses.’
   Böhm seemed to hold Rath personally responsible for his defeat. ‘You heard Superintendent Gennat,’ he shouted, ten minutes later when they had retired to his office. ‘Now get the ball rolling.’
   ‘Me?’
   ‘It’s thanks to you we’re in this position. If you’d made a little more progress on the murder weapon, we wouldn’t have to bother.’
   ‘I don’t understand your aversion to launching an appeal, Sir. The public has helped get many an investigation back on track.’
   ‘First, who said anything about my investigation not being on track? Second, you know perfectly well that for every reliable witness another twenty unreliable ones crawl out of the woodwork, and that’s not counting the busybodies.’
   ‘I…’ Rath didn’t get a chance to finish. There was a loud knock and, before anyone could say ‘come in’, two SA men wearing auxiliary police brassards appeared in the doorway. Behind them, Böhm’s secretary, Margot Ahrens, gestured apologetically.
   ‘I’m sorry, Sir, but the gentlemen wouldn’t take no for an answer.’
   Böhm leaped from his chair. ‘How dare you?’ he thundered. ‘You’re interrupting an official conversation.’
   The brownshirts were unimpressed.‘Detective Chief Inspector Böhm?’ the smaller one asked. Böhm nodded. ‘The commissioner would like to see you.’
   ‘Fine. Tell Herr von Levetzow I’ll come and find him as soon as our meeting is over. In future, a simple telephone call will suffice, especially when we need every available man.’
   ‘You don’t understand. We have orders tobring you to the commissioner. Now get your jacket and come with us.’
   ‘I beg your pardon!’
   ‘The police commissioner would like to see you. Now.’
   ‘You hangers-on would be better off doing as you’re told,’ the second SA man said. ‘You’re finished here.’
   For a moment Böhm was speechless, then it all came out. ‘You’ve some nerve, speaking to me like that. You’re an auxiliary officer! How dare you take that tone with a Prussian police officer?’
   ‘Prussian police officer? Let’s see about that,’ the small man said. ‘You are guilty of multiple breaches of duty, and…’
   ‘Pardon me?’
   ‘Now come with us.’ The SA man placed his hand on Böhm’s shoulder.
   Böhm looked at the hand as if it were an insect to brush away. He opened his mouth but said nothing, halting in the doorway to address his secretary, who didn’t know where to look for embarrassment.
   ‘I’ll be right back, Fräulein Ahrens, it’ll be fine. Go and take your break.’ He looked at Rath and shook his head before following the uniformed officers through the outer office into the corridor.
   Margot Ahrens stared at the door as it shut behind them. She uttered a brief cry of horror, more like a sob, and held her hand in front of her mouth. She looked at Rath wide-eyed, and when all he could do was shrug, she took her coat from the hook and ran outside.
   21
   The fourth years seemed to sense he was distracted. Entering the room like an absent-minded professor, he took the wrong textbook from his bag and almost returned the seventh year essays, two whole lessons early. The article in the morning paper had startled him. Heinrich Wosniak. How long had it been since he’d heard the name?
   Linus Meifert had settled into a modest existence as a senior teacher and tried not to think of that time any longer, at least not during the day. Nights were different. Time and again he wakened drenched in sweat.
   By now such dreams were his only remaining link to the war, and he was proud to live a normal life as a respected, if slightly dotty, senior teacher in Potsdam. How many others had been unable to return, had joined volunteer corps, turned to crime or landed in the gutter like Wosniak?
   The class was staring at him expectantly. No giggling, like in the girls’ lycée years ago. The boys were too disciplined for that. Even so, they were waiting for him to drop his next clanger.
   He cleared his throat.‘Right then, let’s recap. How do I define a parallelogram? Wosniak!’
   No response. No one stood up. Astonished faces.
   ‘There’s no Wosniak here, Sir.’
   Concentrate, damn it!
   ‘Pardon? No, of course not. So. The definition of a parallelogram. We had it last week. Vogelsang, answer when I call your name!’
   Vogelsang stood up straight as if on the parade ground and, for a moment, it seemed as if he might protest against the injustice, but decided against it. That was why Meifert had chosen him. Vogelsang always complied.
   ‘A parallelogram is a quadrilateral in which the opposing sides are equal,’ he said dutifully.
   ‘Good! Sit down. Why didn’t you respond straight away?’ Vogelsang furrowed his brow. ‘Today we are going to practise what we have learned. Open your books and turn to page forty seven.’
   ‘Which exercise, Sir?’
   ‘I just said. Page forty seven. The whole page.’
   The boys obeyed with a collective groan. While the lower third completed a page of algebra, Meifert made himself comfortable behind his desk. Could he really be in danger?
   The article didn’t mention when Wosniak had died, or why. Only a handful of men knew what had happened on the Western Front, most of whom were long in the ground. Meifert had never breathed a word about it and didn’t intend to. After all these years it was the events of March 1917 that still haunted his dreams.
   22
   Rath sat on Böhm’s visitor’s chair and gazed blankly at the Hindenburg portrait on the wall. In his long years of service he had witnessed many summonings by top brass. Usually it was a bad sign. Even so, he had never seen anyone being led away as Böhm had been moments before. Still, his sympathy was limited.
   How many times had he been called to make his report by Böhm? Now the boot was on the other foot. Multiple breaches of duty… It seemed the punctilious detective chief inspector, who demanded even greater punctiliousness from his men, had finally rubbed someone up the wrong way. Rath wondered what Charly would say. He’d never understood why she set such great store by the grumpy so-and-so in the first place.
   The telephone rang in Böhm’s outer office, an internal call. He went through and picked up. Perhaps it would be Gennat, calling to re-assign the Wosniak investigation.
   ‘Detective Chief Inspector Böhm’s office. Inspector Rath speaking.’
   ‘Porter here. Brettschneider. We have someone here requesting to speak with DCI Böhm urgently.’
   ‘He isn’t here.’
   ‘Can I send him up anyway?’
   ‘I don’t know when he’ll be back. Tell your man to make an appointment.’
   ‘He claims the matter is urgent and brooks no delay. It concerns the dead homeless man.’
   The receiver clicked, and Rath heard a clipped but pleasantly warm voice.‘Von Roddeck here. With whom am I speaking, please?’
   ‘Detective Inspector Rath. Detective Chief Inspector Böhm is currently unavailable. What is it that’s so urgent?’
   ‘It concerns the case in today’s paper. The dead homeless man. The pigeon droppings and…’
   ‘If you wish to make a complaint, I must ask you to do so in writing.’
   ‘No, no, I don’t wish to make a complaint. Perhaps I can be of assistance.’
   ‘You were a witness?’
   ‘No, but I knew Heinrich Wosniak.’
   The man on the telephone didn’t sound as if he moved in homeless circles. As for his name… ‘Do you think you could identify Wosniak? He’s still at the morgue.’
   ‘It was a long time ago, but I think so.’
   Rath led Achim von Roddeck to his own office to avoid an ill-tempered Wilhelm Böhm bursting in on their conversation following his return from the police commissioner.
   Baron Achim von Roddeck, to give him his full title, and that wasn’t the half of it. Achim Friedrich Wilhelm Albrecht Achilles… Rath stopped listening after the fifth name. The man had actually pushed his passport across the table when asked for his personal particulars, as if it were important that he be formally identified. Rath handed the passport to ErikaVoss, who was on shorthand duty.
   The first thing he noticed about the man was his immaculate wardrobe. It wasn’t just the suit or coat and hat that he hung on the stand next to the door; his gloves looked tailor-made, and his brightly polished shoes. His ash blond hair – more ash than blond – was perfectly parted, albeit rather thin. The man looked like a yellowing portrait of his own youth. Even so, he could still turn heads, Rath could tell as much from his secretary’s reaction.
   ‘May I?’ Achim von Roddeck asked. He smoked Manoli and his cigarette case was silver and decorated with a coat of arms. Rath pushed the ashtray across the table and produced a light. The baron made no move to offer one of his cigarettes, so Rath fished his own, unadorned, case from his jacket. Overstolz, a price tier below Manoli. Roddeck inhaled deeply. No doubt he was nervous. He shivered as he clapped the cigarette case shut and returned it to his pocket. The coat of arms on the silver lid showed an axe, crossed with a sword, as well as a few other symbols that Rath couldn’t identify.
   ‘You knew Heinrich Wosniak?’ he began. Roddeck nodded. Rath gestured towards Erika Voss. ‘Please answer yes or no, for the record.’
   ‘Yes, I knew him,’ Roddeck said. The shorthand pencil scratched across the page.
   ‘I would ask that you identify the body.’
   ‘Gladly, though I’m surprised it’s taken this long.’
   ‘We’ve been unable to trace any friends or relatives. We have the name from his old service record, which he was carrying in his coat.’
   ‘That sounds like him.’ Von Roddeck appeared almost moved, to the extent that any Prussian indulged in such sentimentality. He drew on his cigarette before continuing. ‘We stood together in the trenches on the Western Front.’
   Rath leafed through the file and opened the worn service record.‘In the First Guards Reserve Infantry Regiment.’
   ‘I served as a lieutenant, and Heinrich was my orderly. A good man. That he should have died this way…’ Roddeck shook his head. ‘Homeless, you say?’
   ‘You say.’
   ‘Well, that’s what it said in the paper. As if it were a disgrace. As if it were pointless even investigating his death. Damn hacks! The man risked his neck fighting for the likes of them.’
   Roddeck’s outrage appeared genuine. All too frequently, would-be soldiers gave voice to their patriotism without having served, without knowing what they were talking about. Achim von Roddeck seemed to know.
   ‘I intend to publish my war memoirs,’ he continued.
   ‘Like Remarque?’
   ‘Nothing like Remarque!’ Roddeck practically hissed in response. ‘Märzgefallene won’t drag the name of German soldiers through the mire. On the contrary, it will show that the blame for the Fatherland’s defeat lies squarely with those who should never have been allowed to wear the officer’s uniform in the first place.’
   ‘Märzgefallene?’ The March Fallen.
   ‘The title of my novel. Pre-printing begins in theKreuzzeitung in less than two weeks, and the work will be published byNibelungen in May.’
   The baron was starting to grate. So, he had written a book… ‘Why are you telling me this? Are you hoping to gain a new reader?’
   ‘I fear my novel has someone running scared. Someone whom I thought long dead.’
   ‘Come again?’
   Roddeck fetched a crumpled sheet of paper from his pocket.‘Read this. I found it in my mailbox two weeks ago, days after the pre-printing ofMärzgefallene was announced.’
   Rath skimmed the document, which looked like a blackmail letter, typewritten, and in block capitals.
   THERE ARE THINGS IT PAYS TO BE SILENT ABOUT. EVEN TODAY ALBERICH CAN STILL BE DEADLY!
   ‘I thought it was a bad joke, but it seems he has made good on his threat.’
   ‘Alberich? Like the dwarf? Strange name.’
   ‘A code name.’
   ‘Of course…’
   ‘You’re aware of Operation Alberich?’ Roddeck asked.
   ‘1917. The retreat to the Siegfried Line.’
   Achim von Roddeck gave a nod of acknowledgement.‘You served, didn’t you?’
   ‘I didn’t make it to the Front,’ Rath replied. ‘A few months too young.’ He shrugged guiltily, an involuntary reaction. He had no call to apologise for being spared the carnage, for having seen out the end of the war in the rear, where, in anticipation of imminent death, he and his comrades had lived each day as if it were their last.
   ‘I was part of it. We evacuated the territory, mined the streets, destroyed the railways, booby-trapped abandoned villages, poisoned wells, you name it. Nothing glorious about it, but that’s war. We did what was necessary.’
   Rath silently disagreed. Operation Alberich was a masterfully conceived manoeuvre, but the way the troops had devastated the abandoned territory, leaving it littered with dead, was a matter of national shame. It was one of the many wartime episodes that had shaken his naive belief in the heroism of hand-to-hand combat, which had been drummed into him since his schooldays.
   ‘Since he called himself Alberich, I thought it might be one of my ex-comrades playing me for a fool,’ Roddeck said. Rath and Erika Voss waited for a name. ‘All these years I thought he was dead. We all did. But he’s alive. No doubt about it, and he killed my faithful Heinrich.’
   ‘Who did, Herr von Roddeck?’
   Achim von Roddeck drew on his cigarette and Erika Voss rolled her eyes.‘His name is Benjamin Engel. He was a captain on the Western Front.’
   At last Erika Voss’s pencil scratched across the page.

   What he served up next was hard for Rath to digest: a convoluted account of the exploits of one Captain Engel, who had stood out for his cruelty during the retreat, and had incited his unit to conceal a gold strike, murdering three people when the episode threatened to come to light. Two minors – French civilians – and a German recruit.
   ‘You covered it up all these years?’
   ‘Engel fell the day after the murders, or so we thought. Why drag the German army’s good name through the mire?’
   We.‘There were other witnesses?’
   ‘Heinrich Wosniak was one.’
   ‘You think this Captain Engel is still alive, and trying to prevent the publication of your novel, which tells precisely this story…’
   ‘Correct.’
   ‘Then why did he murder your orderly, if you and your novel are the threat?’
   ‘My death wouldn’t have prevented its release! Wosniak’s murder was a sign that Engel means business. Isn’t that obvious?’
   ‘This Captain Engel of yours killed, to giveyou a sign?’
   ‘Engel stopped at nothing during the war.Todesengel, we called him. Angel of Death. When I remember how cold-bloodedly he murdered those children, and Wegener, the youthful recruit…’
   Despite finding the whole thing fanciful, Rath had Erika Voss note all the names. Not only was Heinrich Wosniak dead, he had met with a violent end. Exactly how violent, Rath would soon see for himself. His body had been on display in the morgue for some days, standard procedure for those whose identity was unconfirmed.
   ‘I have a gentleman here who knew Heinrich Wosniak from the war,’ Rath explained to the porter. Moments later he and Roddeck stood before the thick glass pane that separated the chilled corpses from onlookers. The showroom was stiller even than a church; the dead demanded respect, or perhaps itwas the attendance of Death that made the living fall silent.
   Wosniak’s corpse was laid at a slight angle so that visitors could examine his face.
   Rath couldn’t work out the man standing next to him. Was Achim von Roddeck a serious witness or just another busybody, the sort who appeared without fail at headquarters following a newspaper appeal?
   Roddeck looked at the body carefully.‘My God, how old his face has grown, and such horrific scars.’
   ‘Burns,’ explained Rath, who had only seen photos until now. ‘Wosniak survived a fire about a year ago. The shack he shared with various others was burned down.’
   Roddeck shook his head.‘A man survives a war forthis.’
   ‘You can identify him then?’
   ‘Yes, that’s my faithful Heinrich. You really haven’t traced any next of kin?’
   ‘But for the service record in his coat we wouldn’t even have his name. Nickname was a different matter.Kartoffel.’
   ‘Kartoffel!’ Roddeck shook his head. ‘It’s a disgrace the way our Fatherland has treated its most loyal sons!’ He sounded as if he weren’t just speaking for poor disenfranchised souls like Heinrich Wosniak, but men such as himself. He looked at his silver fob watch.
   ‘Inspector, do you still need me? I have an urgent meeting with my publisher and the editor of theKreuzzeitung.’
   Rath pricked up his ears.‘You’re thinking of pulling the release?’
   ‘Absolutely not! I’ve given my word. A German officer does not submit to threats.’
   ‘Especially when he doesn’t stand to come to harm himself.’
   ‘What are you saying?’
   ‘This mysterious captain hasn’t ruined your life but that of your orderly. You told me yourself, your own death won’t prevent the novel being printed.’
   ‘Nothing will prevent my novel being printed!’ Achim von Roddeck flashed his eyes at Rath, a look that Kaiser Wilhelm had once made popular. ‘Do you sincerely believe my lifeisn’t in danger?’ He gestured towards the deceased Wosniak. ‘Is that not proof enough of the seriousness of Engel’s threats?’
   ‘If that’s what you think, you ought to have contacted the police sooner, then perhaps your faithful Heinrich would still be alive.’
   ‘You think I don’t blame myself? But that doesn’t mean the police should make the same mistake. See that there are no more victims, Inspector! Find Wosniak’s killer.’
   ‘It isn’t so easy to find a dead man. No doubt your Captain Engel goes by a new name.’
   ‘Then protect me and my men.’
   ‘You want police protection?’ Rath gazed at Roddeck in disbelief. ‘Don’t you think that’s a little… over the top? I wouldn’t hold out much hope given the current situation. The sort of manpower that would entail…’
   ‘I believe my former comrades are in danger, as am I.’
   ‘Some of these men aren’t even from Berlin.’
   ‘Captain Engel wasn’t from Berlin either. He was from Bonn.’
   Rath gave in.‘Perhaps I can assign you a little protection today. If you tell me where your meeting is, I’ll take you there myself.’
   Lieutenant von Roddeck appeared offended, but nodded all the same.’Friedrichstrasse,’ he said. ‘Café Imperator.’
   23
   Including the walk and the number nine autobus, Wilhelm Böhm needed approximately twenty minutes to get from Alexanderplatz to the Prussian Interior Ministry on Unter den Linden, just by the Brandenburger Tor. Who did these upstarts think they were? God knows he had better things to do than justify his methods to the new heads. All this time being passed from pillar to post meant his work was left undone, which was no doubt what they wanted, and how would Rath and Gräf manage without him?
   At least he had been allowed to make his way to the Interior Ministry without brown-shirted accompaniment. In the corridors of the Castle he had felt like a prisoner. He remembered Grzesinski, the former police commissioner, who had been frogmarched out of his office by Reichswehr soldiers last year. Back then the protests had been vocal, but all he had received, sandwiched between two SA auxiliary officers, was the odd sympathetic glance. He felt like a pariah and perhaps that’s what he had become. Certainly the new police commissioner had done nothing to dispel him of this notion.
   ‘You do understand that the police can ill afford such headlines,’ Magnus von Levetzow had barked in the brisk tones of a one-time naval officer. The Berlin police chief tapped the pile of newspapers on his desk, everything from theKreuzzeitung toDer Tag, the latter having upped the ante again this morning.
   ‘With respect, Sir, I’m not responsible for the headlines. I don’t know how these muckrakers got hold of my name.’
   ‘But youare responsible for the methods which are making our police force a laughing stock! We have an important role to play in the new Germany, where we must fight in the national revolution alongside our national forces, and against the enemies of the Fatherland!’
   Levetzow banged his fist on the table, but Böhm refused to be intimidated. He had encountered worse drill sergeants during the war. ‘With respect, Sir, I have a different view of police work.’
   ‘Your view of police work is detailed right here inDer Tag. Do you know how many complaints there have been about the methods employed at Nollendorfplatz? Rightly I might add! You, Detective Chief Inspector Böhm, are making a comedy troupe of the Berlin Police, and the whole city is in stitches. Worse, you are wasting valuable resources. Men who are needed to fight the enemies of the new Germany stand guard over canvasses covered in pigeon dung!’
   ‘There is a perfectly good reason, Sir. The death of…’
   ‘The death of an urban vagrant should have been shelved long ago. We have other priorities, or did I not make myself clear?’
   Böhm stopped listening. However he might respond the outcome was fixed. The commissioner didn’t want any arguments. All he wanted was to give a troublesome officer a good bawling-out. The surprise came at the end, when Levetzow packed him off to the Interior Ministry. They weren’t finished withhim yet. ‘The Daluege Bureau would like to see you.’
   So it was that Detective Chief Inspector Wilhelm Böhm sat wasting his time in an outer office of the Prussian Interior Ministry with his bowler hat in his hands, waiting to be called. He had heard of the Daluege Bureau. Once they had your number the odds were stacked against you. A few months earlier, Kurt Daluege, then working for the Berlin Refuse Department, was appointed by Göring himself to ‘Special Commissar’, tasked with purging the Berlin Police of its politically unreliable elements. So, that was the name given these days to a distinguished officer such as Wilhelm Böhm, who had neither belonged to a party nor politicised on duty in his life. A politically unreliable element.
   At last the door opened and a man emerged with sweaty hair clinging to his forehead. He didn’t appear to see Böhm or the secretary sitting behind her desk, and left the room without a word.
   ‘You can go in now,’ the secretary said.
   Kurt Daluege, a flashy greenhorn with a high forehead and arrogantly curved lips, barely over thirty, sat behind a desk stacked with files. Personnel records, Böhm thought, and inside every one is a poor sod whose career with the Berlin Police is going to hell in a handbasket. The new regime was determined to create as manyfaits accomplis as possible before the vote on Sunday. Daluege was probably taking these files home at night, scouring officers’ biographies for weak points. Böhm couldn’t believe it. A binman was to pronounce judgement on him.
   ‘Take a seat, Detective Chief Inspector.’
   Daluege spoke without looking up from the file he was writing in. Böhm sat on an uncomfortable visitors’ chair that might have come from the interrogation rooms at headquarters. At length Daluege snapped the file shut, set it to one side and reached for the next.
   ‘Detective Chief Inspector Wilhelm Böhm, A Division?’
   ‘Yes.’
   ‘You’re a Social Democrat?’
   ‘No.’
   Daluege made a tick in the file.
   ‘Nevertheless, you are interested in their election programme. Why else would you attend a Social Democrat hustings?’
   ‘Pardon me?’
   ‘You’ve been seen at Social Democrat conventions.’
   Böhm wondered who had seen him at the rally on Sunday and deemed it cause for denunciation. A colleague? An ex-con out for revenge?
   ‘I am a responsible citizen of this Republic, and democrats have a duty to keep themselves informed. Since when do I have to justify attending a campaign rally?’
   ‘You call yourself a democrat – but claim not to be aSocial Democrat.’ Daluege furrowed his brow and threw Böhm a disapproving glance. ‘No doubt you are one of those who hasn’t understood the significance of the national uprising. Wake up, Detective Chief Inspector, the Republic is history! The new age begins now. Germany is on the up!’
   The former waste engineer’s triumphalism was starting to get on Böhm’s nerves, but he checked himself and pretended to listen.
   ‘In times like these there are two types of German,’ Daluege continued. ‘Those who help build the new Germany and those who don’t. The question is: which type are you?’
   ‘The old Germany will do me just fine, I don’t need a new one. As a police officer I work to make things better, or at least ensure they don’t get worse.’
   Daluege wrote a few sentences in Böhm’s file. ‘If you desire a better Germany, your priority should be to thwart the Communist pillagers who burned down the Reichstag and are laying waste to our country. Instead you are withholding your cooperation…’
   ‘I wouldn’t say that. All I did was explain to the commissioner that I am a homicide detective, and murder investigations take precedence over arson attacks in which there are no fatalities. I was only too glad to have Cadet Steinke transferred to the Reichstag task force.’
   ‘You make it sound like an act of mercy.’ Daluege shook his head. ‘Do you know why you are here, Detective Chief Inspector?’
   ‘Evidently because I attended a campaign hustings.’
   ‘You are here because the German Police must ensure it can rely on its officers to play their part in the construction of the new Germany. As matters stand, Detective Chief Inspector, I’m uncertain whether you are playingyours.’
   ‘Meaning?’
   ‘That you’re in luck. For the time being I will refrain from suspending you. Instead you will have the opportunity to prove yourself.’
   Daluege seemed to expect gratitude, but Böhm refused to play ball. He held the binman’s gaze and waited for him to continue. ‘Your case has been reassigned, and you will no longer be working at Alexanderplatz.’
   ‘I beg your pardon?’
   ‘You are being transferred to Köpenick, Detective Chief Inspector.’
   ‘When… when does this transfer take effect?’
   ‘Immediately, of course. What did you think? Get used to the pace of the new age! Now back to headquarters with you and clear your desk. Tomorrow morning, you’ll report to Inspector Brenner.’
   ‘Brenner?’
   ‘He’s head of operations at Köpenick.’ Daluege wrote another sentence in Böhm’s file. ‘You can go now.’
   Böhm’s legs felt like jelly, but soon the old spirit returned and filled him with resolve. He wouldn’t let himself be ground down. They had no cause to remove him from office, and for as long as he was a Prussian police officer he would conduct business as he saw fit. These Nazi upstarts could go hang.
   Nothing lasts forever, he thought,let’s see what the elections bring. He left the office without another word.
   24
   Café Imperator was slightly out of the way, towards the southern end of Friedrichstrasse. Two gentlemen rose when they spied Roddeck. Rath had never seen the gaunt man, but recognised the fat man with the glasses.
   Roddeck made the introductions.‘Martin Frank,Neue Preussische Zeitung, and Gregor Hildebrandt, my publisher – Gereon Rath, Criminal Police.’
   ‘Hildebrandt?’ Rath asked, shaking the fat man’s hand. ‘Didn’t you publish Herr Roeder back in the day?’
   ‘Some time ago,’ Hildebrandt said, evidently flattered that Rath should recognise him. ‘Nibelungen is famous for its true life stories.’
   ‘Or true war stories.’
   ‘War is life, life is war,’ Hildebrandt said seriously. ‘How are you getting on, Inspector? Ever considered putting pen to paper yourself?’
   ‘God forbid!’ Rath raised his hands. ‘No one’s interested in my life.’
   ‘Don’t say that.’
   Rath and Roddeck took their places at the table.
   ‘We’ve just come from the morgue,’ said Roddeck. ‘It really is my faithful Heinrich.’
   Hildebrandt shook his head.‘What do you think, Inspector? Is the murder linked to this poison-pen business?’
   ‘You know about that?’
   ‘I advised Herr von Roddeck to go to the police.’
   ‘Advice you should have given two weeks ago.’
   ‘I only told Herr Hildebrandt this morning,’ Roddeck said.
   ‘What are you going to do?’ Hildebrandt asked. ‘Will Herr von Roddeck receive police protection?’
   ‘That’s not my decision. Besides, it’s still a little early… First we need to examine the facts.’
   ‘Too early? Don’t you think it might be toolate, unless you act?’
   ‘I’m here now, aren’t I?’ Rath lit an Overstolz. ‘How about you? What steps are you taking?’ He turned to Martin Frank, the editor. ‘The easiest thing would be to pull the advance print. You could announce it in tomorrow’s edition.’
   ‘We’ve spent the last few weeks publicising it,’ Frank said. ‘Our readers are expecting the first instalment. If we postpone it, we’ll need a replacement, and negotiations are still ongoing for our next serial.’
   ‘But it isn’t completely impossible? I mean, it’s still two weeks away, and if a human life reallyis at stake, then…’
   Frank looked uncertainly towards Roddeck and Hildebrandt.‘Assuming it met with the wishes of Herr von Roddeck and Herr Hildebrandt, then, yes, postponing is something we might consider. If the police recommended it.’
   Roddeck cut in.‘The police should focus on catching the killer. For my part, I will not submit to threats.’
   ‘The same goes for theNeue Preussische Zeitung, of course,’ Frank interjected hurriedly. ‘I just thought that since the Criminal Police…’
   ‘Yielding to blackmail can’t be in police interests,’ Roddeck said.
   ‘We only have to beseen to be yielding,’ Rath said. ‘Forbearance is not acquittance. It would ease the pressure, that’s all, and give us a week to search for this missing captain. If he is still alive, that is, and responsible for Heinrich Wosniak’s death. To be honest I have difficulty believing someone would kill in order to prevent a book from being published.’
   The publisher looked astounded.‘Hasn’t Lieutenant von Roddeck explained to you what this is about?’
   ‘Operation Alberich, Captain Engel, the murder of two French civilians…’
   ‘…and a German recruit,’ Hildebrandt added.
   ‘This business with the gold. What can I say, it all sounds pretty convoluted.’
   ‘Herr von Roddeck expresses himself better in writing.’ Hildebrandt said, reaching for his briefcase. He removed a thick wodge of papers held together by cord. ‘Here,’ he said, passing it across. ‘Märzgefallene proofs. Read the book and you’ll understand.’
   Rath looked at the wodge in horror.‘How many pages?’
   ‘Five hundred and eighty, but you don’t have to read everything. I’ve marked the most important sections. You’ll realise soon enough that our fears are justified. Captain Engel is cold-hearted and devoid of scruples.’
   ‘A Nazi?’
   ‘What are you saying? The exact opposite.’
   ‘A Communist?’
   ‘No.’ The publisher looked piqued. ‘A Jew.’
   25
   When Rath returned to his office, Erika Voss was sitting at her desk in her hat and coat writing something on a piece of paper. She crumpled it when she saw him.
   Rath looked at his watch.‘I didn’t realise it was so late.’
   ‘You don’t say.’ She passed him Kirie’s lead. ‘I was all set to take her home.’
   ‘Sorry, Erika,’ he said. Kirie wagged her tail contentedly. ‘Traffic.’
   He released Kirie’s collar and she made straight for her favourite place under his desk. Rath followed her into his office and set down the thick stack of papers he was carrying. ‘Any sign of Gräf?’ he asked through the door.
   ‘Finished for the night. Your fiancée was asking for you on the phone just now.’
   ‘She was?’ Rath hung his hat and coat on the stand. ‘Did Gräf have any luck?’
   ‘None. No trace of our dead man.’ Erika Voss could no longer hide her curiosity at the wodge of paper. ‘What’s that?’
   ‘Märzgefallene. Our baron’s novel about his wartime experiences.’
   ‘All that shorthand was for nothing?’ Erika Voss presented him with a neatly stapled file. ‘Interview transcript, freshly typed.’
   ‘You’re an angel.’
   ‘Speaking of which…’ She opened a second, thinner file. ‘Captain Engel was reported missing in March ’17, and declared dead seven years later. At his widow’s behest.’
   Many war widows refused to accept their missing husbands’ deaths, even if it brought them financial difficulties, but Captain Engel’s widow had prioritised inheritance over hopes of a miracle. Perhaps the woman was simply realistic, but how would she react when she learned her husband might not have been killed after all?
   ‘Do you have her address?’
   Erika Voss pushed the file across the table.‘This is everything I’ve been able to find.’
   Rath skimmed the list, which also contained the addresses of some of the men Roddeck had mentioned. Eva Engel still lived in Bonn, but went by a different name.‘Looks like she remarried?’
   ‘I don’t know, but she’s called Heinen these days.’
   ‘Our colleagues in Bonn should pay these men a visit. The widow, too, of course. Is the press appeal ready?’
   Erika Voss removed a letter from her folder.‘You still need to sign.’
   ‘It’s Böhm who needs to sign. Has he been in touch?’
   ‘It’s as if he’s disappeared from the face of the Earth. Fräulein Ahrens isn’t answering either.’
   ‘Strange,’ said Rath. ‘We’ll just have to keep trying. I’ll fill him in tomorrow at briefing.’
   He took out a pencil and signed the document, which contained a precise description of Wosniak and appealed for witnesses who had seen anything unusual at Nollendorfplatz between the 21st and 25th of February.
   ‘Pass it on to Gennat. I’d rather he approved it, if Böhm’s nowhere to be found. Otherwise I’ll just be accused of going it alone again.’
   Erika Voss reached for an internal mail envelope.‘I’ll take this and be on my way.’
   ‘Wait a moment,’ Rath said.
   He had a hunch she was meeting someone, and was pleased at her startled face. Fetching his brown leather briefcase he stowed the Roddeck novel and interview transcript inside.
   ‘Homework,’ he said, attaching Kirie’s lead and reaching for the coat he had only just taken off. Erika Voss looked at him quizzically. ‘Can I drive you somewhere?’ he asked, and her face was transformed by a smile.
   He had parked the Buick on Dircksenstrasse, and started when he saw a familiar Adler sedan tucked in behind.‘Get in, Erika,’ he said, opening the passenger door. ‘I need to do Kirie’s seat.’
   Before Rath unfolded the dickey he went across to the black sedan, the window of which was lowered in the same instant.‘New girlfriend, Inspector?’ Johann Marlow asked from the back. In the rearview mirror Rath recognised a pair of narrow eyes. Marlow’s closest confidant Liang was behind the wheel.
   ‘My secretary,’ Rath said. ‘Better for both of us if she doesn’t see us together.’
   ‘I need to talk to you, and the only person at home is your bride-to-be.’
   ‘Then you should have called headquarters. This isn’t a good time.’
   ‘I need to speak to you today. If you don’t want your secretary to find out, then suggest an alternative location.’
   Rath looked around. Erika Voss was using the time to paint her lips.‘She lives on Wörther Strasse. Is there somewhere we can meet close by?’
   ‘Let’s do it like this,’ Marlow said. ‘I’ll wait around the corner, by the water tower. We’ll talk there in the car. It’ll bebetter for both of us.’
   The window was closed before Rath could say anything. He went over to the Buick and tipped up the dickey. The sedan pulled out of its space and rolled slowly past. Rath released Kirie’s collar and she jumped on the seat. He hadn’t seen Johann Marlow in almost a year, but Rath had the uneasy feeling of being shackled to the man, knowing his career would be over if their association were ever made known, and not just his career. Charly would never forgive him if she found out. Not so much his working alongside a known criminal as lying about it for so long. Four years ago she had made him promise that he’d never see Johann Marlow again.
   He climbed into the Buick and Erika Voss twisted her lipstick shut.‘What did you want with the man in the sedan?’
   ‘Illegally parked.’ Rath started the engine. ‘I politely suggested that this was a no-stopping zone, whether you were a swank with a chauffeur or not.’
   26
   The Jonass department store lacked the pomp of Kadewe or Wertheim, and the tasteful respectability of Tietz or Karstadt, but was no less impressive. Sober and functional, the newly-built eight-storey department store dominated the Prenzlauer Berg skyline, gazing over the districts of Spandau and Friedrichshain from which it drew its custom.
   Hannah had tried at both branches of Tietz, on Alexanderplatz and on Leipziger Strasse; had been in Wertheim and Kadewe, but everywhere she went they threw her out. She still looked like a beggar girl, despite the old coat she had pinched from Aschinger. Her oversized rubber boots, stuffed with newspaper, undermined any attempt to appear even halfway solvent.
   It wasn’t easy finding somewhere to sleep when you didn’t have a penny. The places she had been forced to bed down since Dalldorf! Last night had been a sandpit on the banks of the Spree, where she had shivered until morning. Upon waking she’d dragged herself from bar to bar, taking advantage of thewarmth until her inevitable expulsion. Being thrown out was the one thing she could count on. The waiters couldn’t have her begging or selling her body against the promise of a warm meal.
   More than once she had considered returning to Reinickendorf, where there was at least food and warmth, but then she remembered it wasn’t just Charge Sister Ingeborg or Warder Scholtens who’d be waiting, but Huckebein too.
   Jeder Preis ein Schlager, the sign above the entrance said. Every price a winner. Hannah stepped into the enveloping warmth. At Kadewe one of the uniformed porters had sent her on her way within seconds, but at Jonass she didn’t stand out quite so much. You could buy on credit here, which meant there were more shabby-looking figures about, and fewer judgemental looks. A gaunt girl in an oversized coat attracted little attention. She strolled through the aisles, past the clothes racks and up and down the stairs until she found what looked like a suitable place to sleep.
   The large wooden trunk in the furniture department was the kind of place no night watchman would think to look. Hannah would have liked nothing better than to climb straight in but, as soon as she opened the lid, she felt half a dozen pairs of eyes on her. She gave the trunk a look of appraisal and replaced the lid.
   The department store idea came from the Märchenbrunnen posse. They recalled a girl who would get herself locked in at night so that she could make off with jewellery and so forth. For Hannah the appeal resided less in stealing jewellery than the prospect of a meal and something warm to wear, and the chance of a few hours’ comfortable sleep.
   The Märchenbrunnen posse weren’t a fixed set, not like the hundreds of gangs with martial-sounding names like Red Rats or Black Hand, but a handful of homeless youths or runaways who had chosen the Märchenbrunnen in Volkspark Friedrichshain as their meeting point around the same time Hannah had finally escaped the hell of the Crow’s Nest. The Crows had found her again a few days later, of course, and hounded her back to Bülowplatz. Back to her slave’s existence selling matchsticks on the Weidendammer Bridge along with her bitter, crippled father whose morphine addiction swallowed the greater part of their takings.
   Still, those few days in summer had shown her a life in which she owned little but was free; in which she had friends. Escaping from Dalldorf, memories of those warm nights had driven her back to the Märchenbrunnen, the Fairytale Fountain, but Hansel and Gretel’s noses were covered in icicles and there were no young people for miles around. Since then she spent her days in the Volkspark and surrounding area looking for the posse, and her evenings scouring department stores for somewhere to sleep.
   Yes, she was a thief. The coat wasn’t the only thing, and she didn’t feel guilty – a girl like her couldn’t sink any lower. The only thing that made stealing difficult was the fear of getting caught. If someone handed her over to the cops, she would be sent back to Dalldorf, perhaps even to jail. Somewhere, at any rate, where Huckebein would find her.
   Of course Berlin wasn’t completely safe, but how, she asked herself each day, would she survive outside the big city? Owning nothing but the clothes on her body she was better off in the capital than out in the country where the farmers would chase her off their land. Cold as the winter here might be, there were plenty of opportunities to get warm.
   In the meantime, she took up position in a stairwell of the office wing, where the employees finished earlier than those on the floor. Hannah looked for somewhere to hide in the ladies’ toilet, knowing from her experiences in Tietz that it would be searched before closing. The staff toilets might be different. She waited for the glow of light in the lavatory window to dim… and then started.
   For a moment she didn’t know where she was. She must have fallen asleep. Even the toilets here were pleasantly warm. She considered going properly to sleep, but fear of the night watchman jolted her awake. She didn’t know how late it was, but the light from the department store was gone and it was almost pitch black. She groped her way forwards and out.
   The door to the sales floor was still open. She worked her way gradually towards the furniture department, taking cover behind whatever shelves she could find, until she reached the trunk. Stretching for one of the cushions draped over a nearby sofa, she lifted the lid and climbed inside. She just needed to adjust her legs slightly and everything was perfect albeit dark as an inkwell. Only when her eyes had grown accustomed to the gloom did she notice the cracks in the wood through which light filtered.
   On the cusp of sleep a noise startled her. It must be the night watchman doing his rounds. She scarcely dared breathe, but listened and hoped that he might soon be on his way. The steps drew closer until… Goddamn it! He must have noticed one of the sofa cushions was missing. The lid above her opened.
   Paralysed by fear she squinted upwards; her‘night watchman’ was equally terrified. A boy of perhaps eleven or twelve, dressed even more shabbily than she was, looked down at her out of large, frightened eyes.
   PART II
   SMOKE
   Thursday 2nd March to
   Sunday 26th March 1933
   Smoke, visible suspension of carbon or other particles rising from a burning substance as a result of complete or incomplete combustion.MEYERS GROSSES KONVERSATIONS-LEXICON, 1905
   27
   Neuville, March 1917
   The beam creaks but still refuses to budge. Only when a fourth horse is harnessed does it yield, and the building collapses in a huge pile of dust. The men interrupt their work and applaud as if they had witnessed a vaudeville act. Each time a unit succeeds in collapsing a building the others show their appreciation, only to engage in an even more spectacular act of destruction.
   I let them do as they please, ensuring only that they do not descend into a frenzy of annihilation. A German soldier must never lose his discipline or resort to savagery. Observing this rule even in the chaos of war is what makes us strong.
   Much of our work is already done. Many buildings, above all on the western side, have been destroyed by enemy fire, even the ancient church tower which, until the latest British offensive, had withstood countless allied assaults.
   Our brief is to take care of the rest: the aim of Operation Alberich is to leave nothing behind, nothing which might, in any way, serve the advancing foe. Our sector comprises a dozen of the two hundred villages that must be razed to the ground.
   We detonate rail tracks, bridges and roads, contaminate wells and burn fields, make kindling of orchards and fell roadside trees. Yes, we clear and burn down entire forests. We take everything we can from the houses and cellars before turning them to rubble: food of course, but also items left behind when we deported the men to labour camps, and the women, children and old people to basements and shacks on the edge of Alberich territory, where they are herded together like cattle.
   It might lack the honour of single combat, but this is a necessary and dangerous operation. We will be among the last to leave Alberich territory. Unbeknownst to the enemy, four entire armies have already withdrawn, entrenching themselves in the impregnable ferroconcrete of the Siegfried Position. My unit is one of the last charged with destruction work, simulating the presence of troops who have long since retreated.
   A little away from the village is a splendid estate, left miraculously unscathed by the war, a neat villa with servants’ quarters and gardens. The house is said to have belonged to a bank manager, but presently it is where I reside with my faithful Heinrich, the orderly who has accompanied me since Marne. The garden walls have taken hits, but the house itself remains intact, although its days are numbered. I havetasked my best men with its destruction. On the day we withdraw to the Siegfried Line, we will blow up the bank manager’s villa along with the schoolhouse next to the church where the rest of the men are housed. Chief Artificer Grimberg, a demolition expert holding the rank of staff sergeant, is among the best in his field. The men are preparing the house to his instructions, drilling holes and planting explosives as he dictates.
   I am sitting in the orderly room dictating the situation report, when Wosniak brings a message.
   ‘Beg to report, Sir: there is something wrong with the cellar.’
   ‘What do you mean something wrong?’
   ‘It’s too small. If the Herr Lieutenant would care to see for himself.’
   I follow him down to the cellar, where the men hover in front of a brick wall which until yesterday was the site of wine shelves reaching to the ceiling. The shelves have been cleared and the wine incorporated into army stock in the officers’ mess.
   Corporal Meifert, a budding mathematician, makes his report. The area of the ground floor does not match that of the cellar.
   ‘You’re certain, Meifert?’
   ‘I notice these things, Sir.’
   ‘A false wall?’
   ‘That’s what we suspect, Sir.’
   ‘Knock it down.’
   This is the order they have been waiting for. Private Wibeau, a wiry Huguenot, is already wielding a sledgehammer. He winds up and, as the first blow strikes, around a dozen bricks fall back with a hollow crash. A dark hole opens up in the wall and Wibeau swings the hammer for a second, a third time. The hole grows larger, and when enough light filters into the room from our side, there is a shimmer, which becomes brighter as the chamber reveals itself. Finally we are gazing upon a sparkling wall, which rises above its brick counterpart, perhaps a metre high, and is piled with – gold.
   Wibeau retrieves one of the bars, weighing a solid twelve kilograms, and shows me the embossing.BANQUE DU NORDOR FIN999,9400 oz
   As we later discover, the manager of the Banque du Nord made a secret vault in his private cellar, storing his bank’s gold reserve for safekeeping as our second army stood outside Cambrai.
   ‘This gold is hereby requisitioned,’ I say. ‘It must be taken to safety.’
   I see the disappointment in my men’s eyes. So much gold, and all for the Kaiser. Still, they comply, tearing down the brick wall and fetching the bars from the secret chamber. When there are footsteps on the stairs they stand to attention. As Wegener, recruited to the front just days before, salutes, a gold bar falls from his hands and crashes to the floor. No one laughs. Captain Engel frowns at the foot of the stairs.
   ‘They told me I’d find you here, Lieutenant.’ He looks around. ‘I thought your men were preparing the house for detonation.’
   ‘Beg to report, Sir: we have discovered considerable quantities of gold in the cellar.’
   ‘And?’
   ‘I have given orders for it to be requisitioned and brought to Cambrai before we continue with our preparations.’
   Engel examines the bars, which shine as bright as day in the light of the cellar window, and rubs his chin.‘You are right,’ he says. ‘The gold must not fall into enemy hands, but it is too late for it to be transported to Cambrai. It would hinder our retreat, and jeopardise the outcome of the entire operation.’
   Captain Engel goes to far greater lengths to implement Ludendorff’s brief than is dictated by tactical measures. His unscrupulousness has led some to christen him Todesengel; certainly he seems to revel in the malevolence that accompanies any war. For him Operation Alberich is not simply a duty, a terrible and necessary measure to resist the enemy. On the contrary, he enjoys spreading death and destruction.
   I am not talking of the enjoyment my men take from demolishing enemy houses. The common serviceman may find pleasure in destruction, in the razing of buildings and detonation of bridges, but contaminating wells is an order he fulfills only out of soldierly duty. Not so Captain Engel. For him it is not sufficient to leave behind a wasteland. Rather, the enemy should discover an inhospitable lunar landscape, where death lurks in every cellar, behind every stone. The order to pollute the drinking water is thought to have come from him, likewise the booby traps lining the roads, concealed in our abandoned trenches and dugouts.
   ‘Operation Alberich takes priority, Sir. Of course,’ I reply. ‘But… with respect we can’t just blow up the gold along with the house.’
   ‘Of course not. We’ll take it with us, tonight, but not to Cambrai. Find a secure hiding place, Lieutenant, one that the enemy won’t discover when they move in, or when the fighting has ceased.’ He looks around him, as if making the men swear an oath. ‘Gold doesn’t rust,’ he says. ‘We’ll come for it when the war is over.’
   Engel doesn’t say who he is referring to, but everyone in the room understands. No matter the outcome of the war, the gold belongs to us. Not to the French, and not to the Kaiser either.
   ‘Make your preparations,’ he continues. ‘I’ll wait for your report in the orderly room.’ I salute. ‘And… don’t breathe a word of this to anyone. Can I rely on you? All of you?’ Engel’s gaze alights on Wegener, an ex-grammar school pupil with a reputation as a loose cannon.
   ‘Yes, Sir,’ he says. ‘Not a word, to anyone.’
   There is no need for the other men to respond; their acquiescence is palpable.
   Engel gives a satisfied nod.‘When do you intend to detonate the house, Lieutenant?’ he asks, as if the issue of the gold has been dealt with once and for all.
   ‘On the day of our withdrawal. As soon as we’ve evacuated.’
   ‘I have a better idea. Detonate the explosive charge once the enemy has moved in and taken up quarters. Where is your demolition expert?’
   Grimberg steps forward.‘Chief Artificer Grimberg at your service, Sir.’
   ‘Can you set a time fuse to detonate in a week or two from now?’
   ‘Yes, Sir,’ Grimberg says, clearly uncomfortable at the prospect. Blowing up buildings is not the same as luring people into a deadly trap.
   ‘Good. Then see that it’s done. You are hereby excused from transporting the gold.’ With a satisfied smile the captain climbs the steps once more.
   Todesengel, they call him. Now we know why.
   Needing a break from Roddeck’s stuffy prose, Rath laid down the manuscript and lit a cigarette. Charly had been asleep when he got home, much later than expected, to a bottle of wine with two glasses, one of which was unused. He had poured the rest of the wine, and begun leafing through the novel. Thankfully, Hildebrandt’s markings had spared him the first one hundred and thirty pages.
   Perhaps it was just that this particular type of literature, the ubiquitous, mass-produced military novels, even a book like Ernst Jünger’sStahlgewittern which his father had gifted him for Christmas years before, left him cold. He went to the cupboard, fetched the bottle of cognac and poured himself a large glass before continuing.
   When our work here is done, the village will be unrecognisable, a wasteland devoid of life. We must take this and all the various imponderables of war into account as we search for a suitable hiding place. We need a fixed point in the landscape, a landmark that cannot be destroyed. But what, in this conflict, resists destruction?
   In the forest by the road to Cambrai is an erratic boulder, a huge rock that not even the most powerful grenade can touch, even as it lays waste to the surrounding terrain. We agree to stow the gold here, burying it so deep in the rock’s cloak that it will survive the turmoil of war.
   Oh, I am aware these are anything but honourable intentions – but what is a German soldier to do when his commanding officer not only condones such an action, but orders that it be carried out?
   Today it is clear to me that a man like Engel should never have been allowed to embark on an officer’s career. A German soldier must be able to trust that his superiors are men of honour. In those days I lacked perspective, wasting little time on political matters, and so it was that things took their fateful turn. I am not seeking here to excuse my actions as a twenty-three year-old man. As a lieutenant in the glorious Prussian Army, I ought to have listened to my conscience, rather than a captain who did not merit his rank. To this day I feel ashamed, even if it is a relief to come clean finally, after so many years.
   I had organised a truck, which Wibeau parked outside the bank manager’s villa. The estate was at the far end of Neuville, some distance from the other houses, and infinitely removed from the nearest inhabited building, the village school, where the majority of our men had taken up quarters.
   We waited until midnight to start.
   Captain Engel oversaw every aspect of the operation personally, even counting the gold bars on three separate occasions to ensure that each one landed in the truck. We transported the gold in buckets; when the trucks were fully loaded and Engel had counted the bars for a fourth time, we covered them with a few dirty tarpaulins, which we secured with our assault rifles.
   Wibeau knew the way. Turning off the road he dimmed the lights and drove slowly. None of our comrades could learn of our night-time operation. Captain, lieutenant or private, we were all in the same boat, and would face court-martial if it emerged that we had misappropriated such a large sum (perhaps several million gold marks!)
   A bumpy woodland path led us to the clearing with the boulder. Our vehicle was fairly shaken about, but it was nothing new for these men; at least tonight they wouldn’t be heading to the Front.
   Reaching our destination, we jumped down and fetched the spades from the truck. We spoke quietly and only when necessary. We had already dug the pit and started filling it with gold when events took a dramatic turn.
   The surprise came from the forest.
   They came from the south, meaning they couldn’t see the truck, still less our group, hidden as it was behind the giant boulder. Even so, by the time they spied the truck and its soldiers working in feverish haste to fill a pit with gold bars, it was too late. They stood there, holding hands like Hansel and Gretel, the shock having turned them to pillars of salt. Wosniak caught sight of them first. ‘We have visitors, Sir,’ he said.
   I saw them on the edge of the clearing, still standing wide-eyed, a gaunt-looking youth, perhaps sixteen, and a girl, somewhat younger. Not so much Hansel and Gretel as Romeo and Juliet. Or perhaps just two French children searching for firewood under the cover of darkness. We never found out exactly what they were doing, but it was clear they hadn’t reckoned on encountering German soldiers in the middle of the night.
   Meifert and Wibeau instinctively reached for their carbines and took aim.
   The lovers stood even more motionless than before.
   ‘Que faites-vous ici?’ I asked.
   Before either could answer a shot fell and a dark stain appeared on the boy’s forehead. He fell like a sack and the girl let out a heart-wrenching cry.
   I turned to Meifert and Wibeau in horror; both looked equally startled. As I wondered who had fired the shot, gunfire pierced the night-time air for a second time. I turned around and saw Captain Engel, in his hand a still-smoking revolver.
   The girl had collapsed beside the boy but was still gurgling. Engel fired again from point-blank range.
   Todesengel. On one occasion Engel was said to have killed a French soldier who had been felled by a shot to the stomach, then got caught in the wire in front of our lines. The soldier had been crying for his mother before Engel shot him in the head, an act of mercy, one might think, but later in the dugout Engel explained that he’d done it to prevent the Frenchman from upsetting his company’s morale. For all he was concerned the man was welcome to die like a dog. This was just one of many stories told about him, and no one knew if they were true or not. After that night, I wondered if they might only scratch the surface.
   In the heat of battle one doesn’t stop to think. In war soldiers must do things they can never reveal to their families at home, and all in the name of the Fatherland. Anyone who has seen the strain to which front soldiers are exposed, will know what I am talking about. Each person reacts differently to the horrors of war. Wegener, the recruit, has never served on the front. It almost seems as if these are the first dead bodies he has seen.
   ‘You shot them,’ he says in disbelief. ‘They were children, and you shot them!’
   Engel aims a second bullet at the boy. Blood spurts from his head as if from a fountain.
   ‘Remove the corpses, soldier,’ he says, looking Wegener directly in the eye. ‘Otherwise our hiding place will be compromised.’
   ‘We can’t just sweep this under the carpet. We have to report it. It needs to be investigated.’
   ‘This is a war! People die. Get used to it.’
   ‘What you did has nothing to do with war,’ Wegener says, and his voice nearly cracks. ‘You killed two innocent people.’
   ‘You’re explaining to me what war is, soldier? Do as I say! Remove these corpses!’
   ‘I can’t. This needs to be reported. It needs to be investigated.’
   ‘Calm yourself, man,’ Captain Engel barks. ‘You’re getting hysterical!’
   But Wegener refuses to calm himself, seems, indeed, to have lost all control. He is shaking, there are actually tears running down his cheeks.‘That was murder. I have to report it.’
   ‘What are you talking about? Now, do as I say!’
   Wegener looks around as if seeking support from his comrades.‘We have to report this,’ he says. ‘It is a German soldier’s duty…’
   Before he can finish, Engel has fired the fifth bullet from his revolver. Wegener looks at the dark stain forming on his uniformed chest, as it glistens damply in the moonlight. His eyes seem to grow wider as if he cannot quite understand what is happening, then he topples like a tree and lands head first on the forest floor.
   We stand in disbelief. Todesengel has slain a member of our company like a rabid dog.
   ‘Lieutenant?’
   Engel stows his weapon away.
   ‘Sir?’
   ‘Write in your report: German soldier murdered by French partisans. Perpetrators killed in self-defence.’
   ‘With respect, Sir, that’s not how it happened.’
   ‘You making trouble like that bag of nerves?’ Engel gestures towards the dead Wegener. ‘The truth is what I tell you. Or do you think a lieutenant’s word is worth more than that of his captain?’
   I fall silent as he turns to the others.‘We are all in the same boat, men. There is no room here for traitors. I did what I did for you – because someone had to.’ Somehow Captain Engel still manages to sound cheerful. ‘Now: your report, Lieutenant.’
   ‘Two partisans lay in wait for the inexperienced Private Wegener, but his comrades were able to neutralise them.’
   ‘Very good.’ Engel nods and looks around. ‘The recruit might not have understood, but I hardly need tell you what betrayal means. It is the choice between wealth and court-martial.’ He pauses, and I can see that his words have made an impression. ‘The gold here belongs to us all. But onlyso long as no one mentions this. To anyone, ever. When the war is over, we will return and claim what is ours.’
   I remember still how he said over and not won.
   When the war is over…
   This was the great revelation. A crime that had been suppressed in the turmoil of war was now on the brink of being exposed. The story went on and on, but he couldn’t read any longer. His eyes were closing and the bottle was empty. He stubbed out the cigarette and made his way to bed, snuggling up to Charly, who mumbled something and smelled so good that he fell straight to sleep.
   28
   Something roused Hannah from sleep. When she opened her eyes, everything was dark. She sat up, banging her head.‘Shhh!’ someone whispered. Gradually, memory returned. The Jonass Department Store. The trunk. The boy she had finally allowed in. It was tight but they had snuggled together and fallen asleep. She hadn’t felt so rested in ages.
   The boy lifted the lid and light streamed in so she could see his face more clearly: freckles, shaggy hair that was somewhere between blond and brown. He was twelve at most, surviving on the streets.‘We have to go,’ he said, stretching. ‘If they catch us crawling out of here we’re finished.’
   Hannah followed him out of the basket and trotted behind him through the still-dark department store. In the textiles department the boy swept clothes indiscriminately from the rails and under his arm.
   ‘What are you doing?’
   ‘Kitting myself out. Wouldn’t be worth it otherwise.’
   Hannah, in nightshirt and three cleaner’s overalls under the stolen coat, made for the Ladies’ section. She lifted thick, warm knitted tights, a winter dress, a scarf and underwear, and went to the fitting room to change, dropping her old clothes in the wastepaper basket. The coat was still in decent shape, but the gumboots rubbed her calves. She worked through several boxes of shoes. It wasn’t easy finding a pair to fit. They heard the jangling of keys. She felt panic rising but the boy refused to be perturbed. He laced up new half-boots and gestured for her to be quiet.
   As if she hadn’t thought of that herself! He was the one who’d started on the clothes.
   ‘If they catch us and we never see each other again,’ he whispered, stretching out a hand. ‘My name is Fritze.’
   ‘Hannah,’ she said.
   They crawled along the sales floor until they heard the night watchman’s footsteps. How were they supposed to get out of here? She took a leaf out of Fritze’s book and remained calm as he hurled a large brass ashtray from one of the display cabinets through the half-light. It landed with a loud clang somewhere on the other side of the floor.
   ‘Who’s there?’ the night watchman shouted, moving to where the ashtray had struck against something metal.
   ‘Go,’ Fritze hissed.
   With barely time to catch their breath, let alone think, they ran through a door into the large office wing, descended a flight of stairs and climbed out of a window into an access yard with countless Aschinger trucks. They charged up Prenzlauer Allee, sprinting until their lungs gave out, and used their last ounce of strength to vault a wall.
   Never again, she thought, gasping for breath. Never again would she spend the night in a stupid department store. Leave that to those tattle-tales over by the Märchenbrunnen, but… gravestones. They had landed in a cemetery. It was some time before she had enough air in her lungs to speak. ‘So, you’re Fritze?’
   Fritze had sticky-out ears that glistened red in the rising sun, and freckles on his nose.
   ‘Then good luck, Fritze, and thank you.’
   She marched off in the direction of the Volkspark and the Märchenbrunnen, but realised after a few metres that he was following her. ‘What do you want?’
   He tilted his head like a dog.‘Breakfast?’
   Now she thought of it, she hadn’t eaten for two days. ‘You’re a funny one, aren’t you? Where shall we go? Kranzler or Josty?’
   ‘Bolle!’
   She didn’t realise what he meant until they were strolling along a deserted Winsstrasse, scooping up freshly delivered milk bottles. They could still see the Bolle truck at the end of the street, over by the gasworks.
   ‘The early bird drinks the milk,’ Fritze grinned under his milk moustache, after they’d drained the bottles in a bush by the Immanuelkirche.
   Not so daft after all, the little squirt. You couldn’t eat milk, but it filled you up. She decided to take him to the Märchenbrunnen after all. There was hardly a soul around at this hour, certainly no young people.
   ‘Do you know Fanny?’ she asked. ‘Or Kotze?’
   ‘Who?’
   ‘They meet here sometimes, along with the rest.’
   ‘Nah.’
   They sat by Puss-in-Boots and the miller’s son on the perimeter wall and waited. Fritze kicked stones against the wall and occasionally into the water beyond. She was finding him increasingly irritating, but said nothing. Her bad temper had more to do with waiting in vain for the Märchenbrunnen posse.
   After a while he said,‘I don’t think your friends are coming.’ He tilted his head like a dog again. ‘What are we going to do now?’
   ‘How should I know. I’m not your mother.’
   Fritze winced as if he had been dealt a blow.
   29
   Rath wakened to the scent of coffee wafting through the apartment. The bed beside him lay empty, but from the kitchen he heard pots and pans clattering. He didn’t need long in the bathroom, and less than ten minutes later was fixing his tie in front of the mirror. ‘Good morning,’ he said as he entered the dining room, planting a kiss on Charly’s cheek and taking his place at the breakfast table. She poured coffee. ‘Thank you.’
   ‘Late one yesterday,’ she said.
   ‘Overtime.’
   ‘What kind of overtime?’
   The type that involved chatting to Johann Marlow in the back of his Adler sedan while Liang chauffeured them across town?
   ‘Are you moonlighting as a reader now?’ she asked. ‘Or publishing your war memoirs under a pseudonym?’
   He had left the proofs on the living room table.‘New development in the Wosniak case. A man’s appeared, and I don’t know if he’s crazy, or holds the key to the whole thing.’ He told her about Roddeck and, as always when they discussed police work, she listened with interest.
   ‘Sounds like Böhm’s lumped you with a pretty thankless task.’
   ‘Actually, Böhm knows nothing about it.’
   Charly saw red.‘Don’t you ever learn? Going it alone,again. You need to…’
   ‘How can I tell him when he’s nowhere to be found? He was summoned by the commissioner yesterday morning. I haven’t seen him since.’
   ‘That doesn’t sound good.’
   ‘You can say that again. It’s never a good sign when the commissioner’s involved.’
   ‘Well, you’d know.’
   ‘All it takes is one bad decision. Böhm’s no saint. He doesn’t always play by the rules.’
   ‘I never said he did.’
   ‘At least I’ve never been escorted to make my report by two auxiliary officers.’
   ‘Come again?’
   ‘Two SA officers took him away. It was almost like they were arresting him.’
   ‘You never thought he might have been summoned for political reasons?’
   Rath laughed out loud.
   ‘What’s so funny?’
   ‘Nothing. It’s just… Political reasons? Böhm’s no Communist. Breaches of duty, they said. Multiple breaches of duty. He’s done something wrong, and now he has to take the rap. You just can’t bear to see your hero knocked off his pedestal.’
   Charly shook her head in that arrogant way he couldn’t stand. ‘Haven’t you noticed that things have changed in the last few weeks? Even at police headquarters?’
   ‘Our commissioner’s a Nazi. So what? When the Social Democrats were in charge, the commissioners were Social Democrats. As far as that role’s concerned, being a good police officer has always taken a back seat to party membership.’
   ‘Grzesinski was a good commissioner. Even if he had his SPD membership to thank for his appointment.’
   ‘Friederike Wieking is a good police officer too, despite what you might think about her politics.’
   ‘What are you trying to say?’
   ‘Nazi, Social Democrat, it doesn’t matter. The main thing is to be a good police officer.’
   She looked at him wide-eyed.‘How can you be so blinkered?’
   ‘What?’
   ‘Blinkered! Have you ever thought there might be a difference between the Nazis and the Social Democrats?’
   ‘Of course there’s a difference, but from a politically neutral perspective it doesn’t matter.’
   ‘Gereon, stop talking before I get seriously annoyed.’
   ‘Goddamn politics! Now I remember why I hate it so much. It only causes arguments.’
   ‘Maybe you should take a little time to think before you say anything else on the matter.’ She placed her napkin on the table. ‘Despising politics while spouting such nonsense shows an unhealthy mix of arrogance and ignorance!’
   ‘Well, thank you for the masterclass on arrogance, Fräulein Doktor! That’s the way to show a college drop-out!’
   ‘Just because you dropped out doesn’t mean you’re barred from thinking!’
   ‘And just because you finished your degree doesn’t give you the right to treat me like an idiot!’
   ‘Then stop acting like one. Where are you going?’
   Rath grabbed Kirie by the collar and yanked her into the corridor, took lead, hat and coat from the hook, and slammed the door behind him. Allowing Kirie to jump into the Buick ahead of him, he pulled out of his space with squealing tyres.
   Driving to work alone was getting to be a habit. Alone with Kirie, who seemed content now that she had reclaimed the passenger seat. As they reached the Landwehr canal, Rath realised he’d forgotten the manuscript, which must still be on the living room table, but resisted the impulse to turn around. He couldn’t have her thinking he was backing down.
   ‘Stupid woman!’ Kirie turned her head in astonishment. ‘I wasn’t talking about you,’ he said, ruffling her fur. ‘You understand me.’
   Couldn’t they all just leave him in peace: Charly with her political problems, Roddeck with his meddling demands for police protection, the press with their articles, Böhm with his trench dagger, Gräf with his queer Nazi, and not least Marlow with his latest incitement to ruin.
   ‘SA auxiliary officers have arrested one of my men,’ Dr M. had said in the back of the sedan, ‘and no one knows where he’s been taken.’
   ‘Auxiliary forces are only authorised to make an arrest in the company of a regular police officer.’
   ‘I’m afraid the SA couldn’t care less. The fact is, Long Leo was arrested, and it’s been three days since anyone saw him.’ Marlow pressed a sheet of paper into Rath’s hand.
   ‘Leopold Juretzka. One of Berolina’s?’
   ‘The new head, as a matter of fact. Smart guy.’
   ‘Not smart enough to evade capture.’
   ‘The SA had no grounds for bringing him in. Dr Kohn hasn’t even established where they’re holding him.’
   ‘You’re certain it was the SA?’
   ‘They dragged him out of his flat in the middle of the night and beat him while his girlfriend looked on.’
   ‘There isn’t a great deal I can do.’
   ‘The SA calls itself auxiliary police, and it is precisely in this capacity that they are making our lives difficult.’
   ‘Even the Nazis have their plus points.’
   ‘Have you any idea what happens in these SA basements? They make my men look like choir boys! Find Juretzka before they beat him to death!’
   Find Juretzka! As if it were that easy. The peremptory tone Johann Marlow used was getting on Rath’s nerves, but the man had him by the balls. Still, at least he showed gratitude, unlike the police, who had been stalling his promotion for years. The most he could hope for from Böhm was a misanthropic grunt.
   Rath wondered if Charly might be right. Perhaps this business with Böhmwas political. After the purge of the police executive last year, he’d heard that Social Democrats in mid-level positions were having a tough time. Even so: Böhm, a Social Democrat? No, there must be other reasons. Weinert’s article, Böhm’s refusal to cooperate fully with the Reichstag task force… Whatever, it was hardly his problem.
   Too early for work, he parked in Dircksenstrasse. He took Kirie for a turn around the block but, even so, they were first in the office. He fetched a bowl of water for Kirie, and hung his things on the stand before taking Roddeck’s statement and the list of names from the desk and going through to his room. It was a shame Erika Voss wasn’t there; he could have used a cup of coffee. Instead, he lit an Overstolz and skimmed through the transcript. He wanted to be prepared for briefing; wanted to show Gennat he could workwell in Böhm’s absence.
   He was trying to recall the complicated series of events that had led to the murder of two civilians and a German recruit, when he gave a start. Reinhold Gräf was standing in the doorway, looking as surprised as Rath was himself. Unpleasantly surprised. ‘Gereon, you’re early.’
   ‘Looks that way.’
   It felt strange to be alone in a room with Reinhold Gräf. He hadn’t given what had happened much thought, but now the images returned with a vengeance: the blond Nazi, freshly showered, the strange looks, the breakfast table, the second toothbrush.
   ‘Is it true about Böhm?’ Gräf asked, as he hung his coat and hat. ‘Erika says it’s as if he’s disappeared from the face of the Earth.’
   ‘He was summoned by the commissioner yesterday. Seems serious, two auxiliary officers came to fetch him.’
   ‘What?’
   ‘SA types with white brassards. Our new colleagues.’
   ‘Don’t be so disparaging, Gereon. The SA and Stahlhelm help out as best they can. You can’t expect fully-trained police officers. I’m just happy we have their support against the Reds.’
   As well you might, Rath thought,all those pretty SA youths.‘Well,’ he said, ‘right now we’re hunting a killer.’
   ‘Without the auxiliary police, even more of our colleagues would be forced to help out against the Communists.’
   Why was everyone so interested in politics these days?‘Anyway, Böhm hasn’t been seen since.’
   ‘We’ll catch up with him soon enough, in twenty minutes at the latest.’
   ‘I fear you could be right.’
   But there was no sign of him in the conference room, and it wasn’t until briefing was underway that Rath learned why. Ernst Gennat hadn’t finished his introductions when an unannounced guest burst in and requested the floor. Erich Liebermann von Sonnenberg had been one of CID’s clandestine Nazis, and was now a personnel officer in the Interior Ministry.
   ‘I am here to inform you,’ he began, looking around the room, ‘that Detective Chief Inspector Böhm has left A Division, and will be discharging his duties from Köpenick until further notice.’
   A murmur passed through the room as Liebermann continued. He spoke of Böhm’s transfer as if it were a kind of decoration, even though it was abundantly clear he was being put out to pasture. Köpenick was the Siberia of the Berlin Police and this was a form of banishment. Liebermann said nothing about how long Böhm would be gone.
   All sorts of emotions could be read on the faces of Rath’s colleagues, from indifference and dismay to undisguised schadenfreude. About his own feelings, he was unsure. Yesterday schadenfreude had been uppermost, but today he felt something more akin to pain or shock. The man must have fallen seriously out of favour to suffer a fate like this.
   Buddha, too, had been shocked, even if he wore his usual stoical face. Liebermann whispered something in his ear before leaving, at which point the murmuring started again.
   ‘Gentlemen, you have heard the news,’ Buddha began. ‘Detective Chief Inspector Böhm will be unavailable for the foreseeable future. The Nollendorfplatz team will be dissolved, and its remaining members, Detective Inspector Rath and Detective Gräf, assigned to the Reichstag task force…’
   ‘With respect, Sir.’
   Gennat furrowed his brow. His gaze fell on Rath, who had stood to speak even though he knew Gennat couldn’t abide being interrupted. For a moment the small conference room was eerily quiet.
   ‘My apologies for interrupting, Sir, but with respect, there have been new developments since yesterday in the Wosniak investigation, and I think I should have the chance to present them before the case is shelved.’
   ‘Have you found the trench dagger?’
   ‘No, but as a result of the press coverage a witness has come forward, who identified the dead man and advanced a motive for his murder.’
   ‘Go on.’
   Rath related the strange tale of Lieutenant von Roddeck with fluency, having practised it earlier on Charly. He was greeted by sceptical faces.‘It sounds pretty far-fetched,’ Gennat said.
   ‘True, Sir, but we’ve checked a number of his claims, and so far they’ve all been borne out. Though this Captain Engelwas in fact declared dead by his wife, his body was never found.’
   ‘The witness requested police protection?’
   ‘Indirectly. He takes himself rather seriously.’
   ‘A stuffed shirt then? A busybody?’
   ‘Hard to say.’
   ‘This is something we need to decide here and now,’ Gennat said sternly. ‘If we are to pursue this case against the instructions of the Interior Ministry, I need to say why. So, I would ask again: is this lieutenant a serious witness, or simply vying for attention?’
   ‘Possibly both.’
   ‘You decide, Inspector. You’ve seen and spoken with the man.’
   Rath wasn’t so much concerned about Achim von Roddeck’s character as the circumstances of the case. Pursuing an investigation that had already seen off Böhm, with only Gräf as back-up… Was that something he wanted? To go against the instructions of the Interior Ministry and engage in the potentiallyfutile search for a trench dagger, a phantom, a dead man who might not have fallen after all? For what? To get summoned by the police commissioner and exiled to Köpenick?
   It seemed more sensible to join the hunt for Communists. To put his career first and make a good impression on the new commissioner. To avoid attracting the suspicions of the Daluege Bureau.
   ‘He does seem a little paranoid, Sir, and he’s certainly a busybody.’
   ‘Thank you,’ Gennat said. ‘Then for the time being, the case is shelved. Collate and file everything you have. After that you and Detective Gräf are to report to Section 1A. Dr Braschwitz is expecting you.’
   ‘Yes, Sir.’
   Another murder investigation placed on the back burner. These days the only cases being worked were political. Take a Nazi murdered by a Communist, and the manpower was guaranteed, but as far as regular cases went, suicides, crimes of passion, quarrels ending in death, Gennat was operating with a skeleton staff. Even Buddha, respected though he was, could do little about it. The new commissioner and his fellow party members in the Interior Ministry held the whip hand.
   So, shortly after two o’clock, Rath climbed the stairs to Section 1A. The Political Police and CID were separated by a single floor, but it was rare for Rath’s colleagues to stray up here. CID didn’t think much of the Politicals, and the Politicals didn’t think much of CID. The two departments had been locked in mutual antipathy for as long as anyone could remember.
   He knocked on the door assigned him by Gennat, not knowing if Gräf had already reported for duty since, after ducking out of lunch together, he had driven back to Charlottenburg to collect Roddeck’s manuscript. That, too, was part of the Wosniak file being compiled by Erika Voss. Reaching Carmerstrasse he had considered calling Charly in G, but thought better of it. It was strange being alone in the flat after this morning. Soon his guilty conscience would steal a march on his pride – but not yet. Rudolf Braschwitz was in charge of the task force established by Göring on the night of the fire.
   ‘In essence the Reichstag task force comprises only four officers,’ Braschwitz said, ‘and that’s how it will stay. Nonetheless, your support will be vital in carrying out accompanying measures.’
   ‘Accompanying measures?’
   ‘The question of whether there is a Communist conspiracy underlying the attack and, if so, how far does it reach.’ Braschwitz leaned over a handwritten duty roster. ‘I’ll be assigning you to Detective Zientek. He’ll fill you in. I see you have plenty of interrogation experience. That’s good.’ He wrote down the name and office number.
   Paper in hand, Rath scoured around for the correct office, feeling like Kaspar Hauser searching for home. At least working for the Political Police he wouldn’t have to do any overtime, or so he thought.
   ‘Gear yourself up for duty on Sunday,’ Detective Zientek said, no sooner than Rath introduced himself.
   ‘Detective Chief Inspector Braschwitz didn’t mention anything about that.’
   ‘I’d be glad to make things more formal if you wish. Take Saturday night off. It isn’t so important.’
   Erwin Zientek struck Rath as unpleasant, confirming all his preconceptions about the Political Police. Even his face, with its thin moustache and balding head, was apt somehow. The man was as smarmy as an insurance agent.
   ‘We have hundreds of Communists in custody, if not thousands,’ Zientek continued. ‘They all need to be interrogated. As a CID officer you’ll know how an interrogation works.’
   Of course I fucking do.‘But Sunday’s polling day!’ It was also Rath’s birthday, but he wasn’t about to get started on that.
   ‘Precisely.’ Zientek winked as if letting him in on a secret. ‘The polling stations open at eight. Cast your vote and get yourself down to Alex. No use in complaining, everyone else is on duty too. Braschwitz won’t be making any exceptions and, believe me, we’ll need every man. You’ll see.’
   30
   They had been interrogating these youths for days, directing the full force of the state on a bunch of kids for – what? An isolated piece of graffiti. On two occasions now Charly had sat facing boys, one seventeen, the other nineteen, apparently members of the Red Rats, who’d found their way to police headquarters via some SA basement. Charly had left the questioning to Karin van Almsick, preferring totranscribe, but even that was too much. Was she, Charly, too soft for police work?Was this even police work? She couldn’t get them out of her mind. Worse than the bruises and blood-encrusted wounds were the empty eyes gazing back.
   After each interrogation, Karin van Almsick would make for the tea kitchen as if nothing had happened, gossiping about her latest admirer, a dashing SA auxiliary officer, and salivating over the new Germany. Charly had to be careful not to send her cup flying…
   ‘What do you think?’ Karin asked. ‘Is it an administrative headache? How long would it take?’
   ‘How long would what take?’
   ‘Changing my surname.’
   ‘You just have to say ‘yes’ in front of the registrar and bang: your husband’s name will be yours.’
   ‘That’s one way, I suppose, though Rudi hasn’t asked me yet. I just want to get rid of thisvan as soon as possible.’
   ‘Come again?’
   ‘Thevan in my name. It’s what I’ve been saying this whole time. I want to beAlmsick, notvan Almsick.’
   ‘Why? You’ve nothing to be ashamed about. Dutch settlers have contributed just as much to Prussia’s rise as the Huguenots, Jews, Poles, Salzburgers, and all the rest.’
   ‘I don’t have anything against the Dutch.’ She gawped at Charly. ‘Still, I’d prefer if you… Look, if you need to use my surname, just call me Karin Almsick, all right?’
   ‘But why?’ Charly was losing patience.
   ‘Why do you think? Because of van der Lubbe, of course.’
   Charly couldn’t believe it. Karin was actually being serious. She lifted her eyes to the ceiling.Why, oh Lord, must you punish me with this woman? With that she reached a decision. The Ritter family had provided generations of loyal service to the Kingdom and Free State of Prussia, never once missing a day of work. As for feigning illness to do so… Her father would be turning in his grave, but this was no longer his Prussia or hers. The land of her forebears was being transformed into something she couldn’t abide.
   ‘I don’t feel good. Must have caught something on the night of the fire.’
   ‘It can happen at this time of year. I have a sore throat myself.’
   ‘We can’t both succumb…’
   ‘I’ll be OK. Tea helps, but if you don’t feel well, you should rest. It’s no good you giving us all the lurgy.’
   ‘Can you can manage the rest of the day without me?’
   Karin nodded.‘I’ll ask Wieking for a stenographer.’
   There, you’ve sunk so low that a stenographer can take your place.
   She’d have been better off staying with Gennat in Homicide. Even as a stenographer she’d been able to perform meaningful work there. More meaningful than anything she’d done since. She took her leave.
   Emerging onto Grunerstrasse, in front of the vast brick building that was police headquarters, she lit a Juno and took a deep breath. Weekend! She wouldn’t have to set foot here again until Monday. Sunday was polling day. She was pinning her hopes on the Nazis haemorrhaging more votes, and this farcical episode with Hitler as Chancellor drawing to a close. The prospect of a working majority in the new parliament might be a distant dream, but if the brownshirts continued their downward spiral, Hindenburg would surely withdraw his confidence in the loudmouth ‘Bohemian private’. Better to have a man like Papen or Schleicher installed as Chancellor; but best of all someone who might put the brakes on the SA, who now behaved as if they ownedthe city.
   The world might seem more normal on Monday, and she could enjoy her job again. She might even be able to put up with Karin, with or without thevan.
   The S-Bahn was more or less deserted as she took her seat. She gazed out of the window as the train rolled out of Alexanderplatz, thinking back to the morning and realising she had gone too far. She had more or less called Gereon an idiot, but how could he be so naive? Granted, she shouldn’t have said certain things, but he shouldn’t have flounced out of the flat like a petulant child. She couldn’t help but smile. They were each as pig-headed as the other, which made any reconciliation needlessly fraught. She’d hoped he might call to apologise, but he hadn’t been in touch.
   The last few days were for the rubbish bin. Chuck’em and forget they ever happened. It was high time they embraced and went to bed together, which they hadn’t managed since his return from Cologne. The day before yesterday she’d slept at Greta’s, yesterday he was back late. Perhaps he was just tired this morning – and she was in her usual bad mood, the source of which was the Castle, police headquarters, a place that had once been like a second home.
   Someone had left a newspaper on the wooden seat opposite:Der Tag. Not exactly her preferred choice, and it was yesterday’s edition, but the first paper she’d seen in a while.
   There was a twenty thousand mark reward for anyone with information about the Reichstag fire. She doubted the appeal would be of much use to the task force but, all at once, her eyes fell on a different article. Though it was the byline that grabbed her attention, she soon stumbled upon the wordshomeless man andNollendorfplatz in the title. She read on, and by the end, realised that she, Charlotte Ritter, was the biggest fool ever to have carried a police badge.
   31
   She was smiling again, she was even smiling athim, and that was worth whatever the evening might cost. Rath knew it wouldn’t be cheap. Horcher, small but perfectly formed, was one of the most atmospheric restaurants in the city, and one of the most expensive. If your luck was in, you could rub shoulders with the great and the good. Charlie Chaplin had called in during his Berlin visit, and more than one UFA star wasknown to dine regularly here on Lutherstrasse, as well as political notables of every persuasion. It hadn’t been easy switching their table reservation from Sunday to Saturday, but Rath knew just the man to call.
   He opened the passenger door and held out his hand, earning himself another smile. Twenty-four hours ago the smart money was on their weekend passing in silence; forget about going out, or eliciting a smile. In point of fact he hadn’t even reckoned on seeing her, thinking he’d driven her back to her mother, or at the very least to Greta. Yet here he was helping her out of the car on Lutherstrasse, and delighting in that smile.
   He hadn’t told her where they were going, only that she would need to dress for dinner, and so he enjoyed her wide-eyed stare all the more when she realised where they were. No doubt she was wondering whether a place like this wasn’t too expensive for a police couple. He hoped his inheritance from Uncle Joseph might still serve as an explanation. Once they were married, things would be trickier. Charly might not be the perfect housewife, but in financial matters she was by far the more careful, and had even started a housekeeping book.
   The head waiter, initially so blasé, bowed and scraped on hearing the name Rath. ‘But of course, Herr Rath, if you would be so kind as to follow me. We have a fabulous table for you.’
   The staff in Horcher was as numerous as it was discreet. He needn’t have worried about Marlow’s name being mentioned. A man in tails took their coats as a colleague led them through the dining room into a smaller lounge, where a bottle of champagne stood in a cooler on a freshly laid table. No sooner had Charly taken her place than a third man slid a footstool under her seat and they felt as if they were the most important people in the world. Horcher had made an impression on Charly, and Rath was pleased as Punch.
   They sat by the window and looked out onto Lutherstrasse. Diagonally opposite, a building front displayed an old sign for Eldorado, a transvestite bar Rath had visited during his first days in Berlin. On duty, when he was still working for Vice. It had been forced to close in summer, one of the first official acts of the staunchly conservative police commissioner Melcher, who had been appointed last year by Papen. Around a hundred queer bars in Berlin had been closed. The Nazis didn’t stand for any ofthat nonsense, even though half the SA were… Suddenly Rath remembered the blond youth standing half-naked in Gräf’s kitchen, inhis old kitchen, and shuddered. For all he tried to erase it from his mind, the image refused to budge.
   ‘What’s wrong?’ Charly asked. ‘Are you cold?’
   ‘I get it whenever I come into the warmth from outside.’
   A waiter filled their champagne glasses, while the maitre d’ distributed the menus and recommended the house speciality,Faisan de Presse, pheasant bones, minced to give the sauce its special flavour. Charly looked at the menu and checked there were no waiters close by.‘Gereon,’ she said. ‘Isn’t this a little expensive for us?’
   ‘You only live once.’ They clinked glasses. ‘Luckily, we don’t have to get by on a single salary.’
   ‘On two salaries,’ she corrected.
   ‘There’s also Uncle Joseph’s inheritance. God rest his soul.’
   Charly fell silent. Rath knew she came from poorer circumstances, and expected little by way of inheritance. She couldn’t know that Uncle Joseph hadn’t left him much, or that the money in his account was from Marlow’s handouts.
   ‘Thank you for this,’ she said. ‘What are we celebrating? Your final night as a thirty-three year old?’
   ‘Why not?’ Rath raised his glass a second time. ‘Here’s to tonight.’
   He thought back to their reconciliation yesterday evening in Carmerstrasse. On returning home he had discovered her in the kitchen in a frenzy of activity. He stood speechless as she greeted Kirie.‘You like Bouletten, don’t you?’
   ‘Are you talking to me or the dog?’
   She advanced cautiously, taking him in her arms.‘I’m sorry about this morning, Gereon. I’m such a clot.’
   She had actually apologised! Something must have happened, and he’d soon find out what. After tentatively conceding that there might be political reasons for Böhm’s exile after all, he was met with a shake of the head.
   ‘No. Böhm was summoned because the press made a mockery of his case, and that’s my fault.’
   ‘Weinert wrote the article, not you.’
   ‘Where do you think he got his information?’
   ‘Come again?’
   ‘I met him at the Reichstag on the night of the fire. He had already filed his story and, frozen as we were, we wound up in an automat on Friedrichstrasse.’
   ‘And…’
   ‘And I mentioned Böhm’s case, Wosniak and the set-up at Nollendorfplatz, which you’ll remember was partly my idea. I couldn’t have known he’d make a story out of it.’
   ‘What do you mean, you couldn’t have known? Weinert’s a journalist, he makes his living turning information into stories. Especially information no one else has.’
   ‘I thought he was your friend.’
   ‘Someone like that can never be your friend.’
   ‘Someone like that?’
   ‘A hack like Weinert.’
   ‘Either way I’m going to apologise to Böhm. I owe him that much.’
   ‘Do whatever you think is necessary, but don’t blame yourself. Above all, don’t get mixed up in this. You arenot responsible for Böhm’s fate. His card was already marked.’
   He took her in his arms, and she nestled close. The crabbiness of the previous days was gone, and he kissed her properly for the first time since returning from Cologne. The news that he had to work on Sunday sobered Charly up somewhat, but by that stage they were lying next to each other sharing a cigarette, one of his as always. Never enthusiastic about his birthday, Rath wasn’t in the least put out by having weekend duty foisted on him by the Politicals. Even so, he put on a disappointed face, and said: ‘What can you do? There’s a time for work…’
   ‘And a time for play… but why Sunday, when they’re giving you Saturday evening off?’
   ‘You know what the Politicals are like. Always making a huge secret of everything.’ Which was when he realised they could just as well go out on Saturday, and Johann Marlow had made it possible.
   What made Horcher unique was that the dishes were prepared at your table. Charly chose steak tartare and pheasant, Rath smoked salmon and chicken kiev. They watched as the chicken was braised and the pheasant flambéd. It all tasted wonderful. Though it wasn’t necessary he added a pinch of salt, just as he had with Charly’s Sauerbraten and yesterday’s Bouletten.
   ‘So, what exactly are you doing tomorrow?’ she asked.
   ‘Interrogation’s the name of the game. That’s all CID are good for, according to my new colleague.’
   ‘Interrogation. To what end?’
   ‘To uncover links between van der Lubbe and our Berlin Communists.’
   ‘You actually think they exist?’
   ‘We’ll find out soon enough.’
   ‘According to canteen gossip, even Diels thinks van der Lubbe was acting alone.’
   ‘Diels? The head of 1A?’
   ‘Your new boss,’ she said. ‘It’s all Göring’s doing. He wants evidence that points to multiple perpetrators and a Communist conspiracy. By hook or by crook.’
   ‘Still, it’s not like you’re doing anything different, implicating a harmless gang of youths in a political conspiracy.’
   ‘Which is exactly why I reported sick yesterday. I hope things ease off again after the vote. If they don’t, I’m not sure I can continue to work in G Division.’
   ‘Where would you go?’
   ‘Maybe I can get a pass back to A if Gennat puts the case strongly enough. I’ve been part of homicide teams before.’
   ‘Not even Buddha can help you there. The only women in A Division are stenographers.’
   She looked at him angrily.‘In the meantime we’re working for Göring more than Levetzow,’ she said at length. ‘Things can’t go on like this.’
   ‘Göring or Levetzow – what’s the difference? They’re both Nazis.’
   ‘Yes, but Göring is deploying police officers specifically to hunt Communists.All police officers, not just Diels and the Politicals.’
   ‘Maybe that isn’t as daft as you think. The Communists want to destroy our Republic.’
   ‘And what do the Nazis want?’
   ‘Things aren’t nearly as bad as people make out. The election’s tomorrow, which means we must still live in a democracy.’
   ‘We’ll see about that. I hope the Germans haven’t gone completely mad, but, honestly, I don’t know anymore.’
   An unearthly quiet passed through the restaurant. The maître d’ was speaking insistently to the head waiter, who kept looking over at Rath and Charly’s table. The waiters tried hard to conceal it, but they had been seized by temporary panic.
   At length the maître d’ approached. ‘I’m very sorry about this, but if I could ask you to take your dessert in the main lounge?’
   Rath was tempted to make a fuss, knowing he had Marlow’s influence to call on but, seeing Charly’s face, decided not to ruin their night. He wondered what on earth could have happened for a restaurant to be so foolish as to undo a table reservation made by Johann Marlow. Was Charlie Chaplin back in town, or Max Schmeling?
   Two waiters led them to their new table, which, though no longer next to a window, was even more secluded. Rath looked on as two diners took their old seats, a fat man in evening dress accompanied by a considerably slimmer woman. Until now Rath had only seen his face in photos: Hermann Göring, Reich Commissar for the Prussian Interior Ministry, their supreme commander and head of the Prussian Police. A widower of two years, he was on the hunt for a bride. Or perhaps he was out canvassing for his party?
   So, Göring was more powerful than Johann Marlow. To Rath that was more impressive than the Pour le Mérite he wore – evidently medals were a feature even of the minister’s evening dress – and all the various offices he held besides. Horcher would never have altered a table reservation made by Johann Marlow for Severing, or any of the other Social Democrats who’d headed the Prussian Interior Ministry.
   This wasn’t how he’d imagined their special night. He decided to leave as quickly as possible and see in his birthday at the Kakadu-Bar. They’d take their digestif there, knowing it was a guaranteed Nazi-free zone. The brownshirts didn’t like the place; at Kakadu, they even allowed Negros on stage.
   32
   Although they arrived early, a long queue had already formed outside the polling station. Rath looked at his watch.‘I need to be at the Castle by ten,’ he said.
   ‘They’re not going to bite your head off for fulfilling your civic duty.’
   He wasn’t sure if Charly was being ironic. It was only the second time they had voted together, despite many opportunities in recent years.
   As the queue moved slowly, he imagined himself at home, listening to Duke Ellington with coffee and a cigarette. At least it was getting warmer, not long now until spring. He put an Overstolz to his lips and offered one to Charly, who declined. He shrugged and struck a match. Hopefully they’d be inside by the time he finished.
   Men in uniform stood on the perron outside the entrance: SA officers minus the auxiliary police brassards. He breathed a sigh of relief. The last thing they needed was polling stations supervised by party loyalists. Instead that task fell to a lone cop who bobbed up and down on his bootheels looking stern, as if that would be enough to ward off Communist insurgents. The truth was, any Reds planning to disrupt voting in upmarket Charlottenburg would be more likely dissuaded by the SA than a single uniformed cop.
   Three SA officers were in attendance, along with two members of the Stahlhelm. Rath couldn’t see any representatives from the Reichsbanner. The Democrats appeared reluctant to provoke their nationalist counterparts.
   The SA men wore campaign posters over their brown shirts.When times were hard Hindenburg voted for Hitler, now it’s your turn. Vote List 1. Above the slogan was a picture of the Reich President and his Chancellor. Hitler looked at the old field marshall with such reverence they might have been father and son. The Führer’s gaze was more hypnotic on the second poster, which also showed him next to Hindenburg.The Reich will never be destroyed – if we are loyal and as one. The third SA man was positioned next to the main entrance. His poster showed President and Chancellor looking down on a sea of people waving swastika flags – almost as if Hindenburg had joined the Nazis. Did the old man realise how much he was being exploited?
   The Stahlhelm campaign appeared staid in comparison.Vote List 5: Hugenberg, Papen, Seldte. Kampffront Schwarz-Weiss-Rot. The men who had helped bring Hitler to power. A man in a fur coat with a bowler hat and thick glasses descended the stairs.
   ‘Good morning, Herr Doktor,’ Charly said. Dr Bernhard Weiss was the former deputy commissioner of the Berlin Police, and their old boss. Rath tipped his hat.
   Weiss’s face brightened. ‘Good morning. Let’s hope it’s a good evening too, eh?’
   ‘And that the early editions give us reason for cheer,’ Charly said. ‘Maybe by this time tomorrow the police guard outside your house can be stood down.’
   ‘We’ll see,’ Weiss smiled.
   The three SA officers began whispering. The second man pointed at Weiss.‘It’s Isidor,’ he cried. ‘What does he want here? I thought he’d be in Palestine by now.’
   The other brownshirts guffawed. Before Weiss could respond, Charly broke the line and planted herself in front of them.‘This man is Dr Bernhard Weiss, and he is the best police officer Berlin has ever known.’
   The brownshirts stared blankly and a smile formed on Weiss’s mouth.
   ‘And you lot call yourself auxiliary police?’
   ‘Easy does it, Fräulein. It was only a joke.’
   ‘Then I’m glad you’re not a comedian.’
   The man turned red as the whole queue burst out laughing, even the Stahlhelm officers and one of his SA colleagues. Charly reclaimed her place in the queue as Rath waited for the brownshirts to launch their attack, but none came. The comedian poked his colleague in the ribs and tried to stop him laughing.
   Rath turned to speak to Weiss, but he had gone. He made a point of taking Charly by the hand. The brownshirts would have him to deal with if they tried anything, but he and Charly passed without further incident. The SA men gazed to the side or down at their puttees.
   Standing in the booth, Rath hesitated for a moment as he skimmed the long list of parties. As a good Cologner he’d always voted for the Centre Party. The only time he’d voted in Berlin was last November when Charly had compelled him.
   He hesitated another moment before placing his cross next to the SPD. The Social Democrats. Never again, he told himself. God knows he didn’t have much time for the workers’ party, but he thought them most likely to defy the Nazis. More likely than the Centre Party, which was yet to take a stance on the new government. Perhaps it was a little thank-you to Grzesinski, whom Rath had rated highly as police commissioner. Even so, he felt a little ashamed as he cast his ballot. Gereon Rath votes SPD! If his father learned of it, he’d be disinherited.
   He smiled to himself as they left the polling station. Only one of the SA men risked an angry glance, but now it held respect. Charly refused to look at the brownshirts, but when she linked arms with him he felt proud. Perhaps she was right. Tomorrow it would be over, and the Nazis would creep back inside whatever hole they’d emerged from. If the election didn’t see to it, then at some point Hindenburg must put an end to this brown-shirted farce.
   Outside Bernhard Weiss’s Steinplatz residence a dozen uniformed cops stood guard. He had lived here since being evicted from his police apartment in Charlottenburg, and Rath was relieved the Berlin Police hadn’t simply hung him out to dry.
   He accompanied Charly to Carmerstrasse, where the Buick was parked, handed her Kirie’s lead, kissed her and made his way to the Castle. There were voting queues all over the city, each one accompanied by SA officers holding posters and shooting angry glances. Detective Zientek waited inside for him.
   ‘Haven’t you voted?’ Rath asked as he hung his coat.
   ‘Of course,’ Zientek said. He seemed to be in an excellent mood. ‘Zap, zap, job done. Doesn’t take much, does it?’ He rummaged in his in-tray and handed Rath a list. ‘These are ours.’
   ‘What is it we’re doing exactly? I’ll need more than just a list of names.’
   ‘They’re all Communists, I can guarantee you that.’
   ‘So?’
   ‘So, get going. Show me what you can do.’
   ‘What am I meant to extract from them?’
   ‘Whatever you like, Inspector. In the best case, evidence of a Communist revolt. If they should confess to a murder, a break-in, or even to being queer, that’s equally good. The main thing is to keep ’em here until six o’clock.’
   Rath needed a moment.‘Six? That’s when the polling stations close.’
   ‘Correct.’
   ‘We’re preventing them from voting?’
   ‘No flies on you CID officers.’ Zientek extended a hand. ‘Welcome to the Political Police.’
   33
   It seemed almost as if the entire SA had found its way to Steinplatz shortly before polling closed. All Charly wanted was to take Kirie for a walk before dusk, but the Nazis had turned the square’s green spaces brown. SA officers continued to appear in droves, and Charly’s evening stroll with Kirie was transformed into an obstacle course.
   Men in brown shirts looked up at the apartment on the second floor of number 3, Steinplatz.‘Isidor!’ they chanted. ‘Come out, or we’ll come in!’
   A cordon of uniformed cops blocked Weiss’s apartment building on all three sides, preventing the brownshirts making good their threat. So, it wasn’t just the SA that had increased its presence here, Charly noted with relief. At leastthese officers were still on the right side.
   She held Kirie at a distance from the mob. No one paid her any attention, but all these angry, red faces gave her the creeps. The SA were always unpredictable, especially in numbers. What if her friend from this morning spotted her and alerted his mates? Or one of them got it into his head that she looked Jewish? It wouldn’t be the first time; the fact that Charly had no Jewish blood didn’t matter. Her short, dark hair made her suspicious; SA men went wild for blonde pigtails. She crossed Hardenbergstrasse and walked north-west towards the ‘Knee’ and the green spaces of the technical college, where there were no brownshirts, just normal pedestrians enjoying a Sunday stroll. Berlin as it had always been.
   She completed the short circuit back to Hardenbergstrasse, but something was happening over on Steinplatz. Quickening her step, she saw the mob surge towards the cordon.
   ‘Move to the side!’ the brownshirts cried, all the time chanting: ‘Jew filth! Jew filth!’
   A uniformed cop raised his arm and shouted something. Not the command to attack, as she’d initially thought, quite the opposite: the police cordon dispersed, and the SA men stormed inside. By the time she finally made it through, Steinplatz was as good as deserted. Only a few brownshirts remained along with the cops, who suddenly looked strangely out-of-place.
   She didn’t like to think what the brown mob might do with Bernhard Weiss and his family. ‘How can you just stand there?’ she asked.
   ‘Did you see how many there were? How can two dozen cops face down a hundred or more SA officers? It was only reasonable to withdraw. We couldn’t have held position another five minutes. People would have died.’
   ‘And now?’ Charly almost screamed. ‘What do you think’s going to happen when they get their hands on Dr Weiss?’
   ‘He should have gone before.’
   She was about to head inside when she felt an authoritative hand on her shoulder.‘I can’t let you go in there, Fräulein.’
   ‘You let that lot in, but notme?’
   ‘Too dangerous for a woman.’
   ‘Thenyou go in before it’s too late.’
   ‘I have my orders.’
   ‘What orders? To guard the lawn or the lives of those inside?’
   Charly looked at the cop, who avoided her eyes, then towards the elegant front door she was forbidden from entering, and inside to the brightly lit stairwell. The first brown uniforms appeared by the windows on the second floor. What would happen? Would they start throwing out furniture, then people?
   34
   It started at a quarter past six, when Berthold Weinert took the first call from the municipal district of Brieg. Either it was a tiny ward or they were speedy counters up in Silesia. The phone hadn’t stopped ringing since.
   He telephoned and jotted down election results as if he were working on a factory line. In fact, he was sitting in a well-heated editorial office high above Kochstrasse, savouring the warmth and view of the winter street below. Finally he could trade his freezing garret for the bustle of activity Voting Sunday had triggered in news desks across the land.
   The election dictated editorial proceedings, everything else was secondary. Proofs for the morning edition were postponed until the small hours. It would be a long night for everyone, not that Berthold Weinert minded. After more than three years he was glad to experience the chaos of day-to-day news production again.
   His Reichstag fire story had returned him to the fold, though he’d been careful to omit his encounter with Göring. The last thing he needed was for the fat minister to link him with the journalist from the burning Reichstag, and place him in the dock with van der Lubbe and the rest.
   He had to go carefully. TheBerliner Tageblatt, for which he had written before being shown the door in the bitter cold of January 1930, was Jewish-owned and regarded as left-wing by the Nazis. In Theodor Wolff it had a Jewish editor-in-chief, or used to have. After writing an article that was critical of the Nazis in the days following the fire, Wolff had fled abroad, and been summarily dismissed by his – also Jewish – publisher on Friday. With him, more than a quarter of a century of experience had vanished overnight.
   Weinert knew from experience how swiftly the Mosse-Verlag could wield the axe. He hadn’t criticised anyone in his story, nor had he written up the rumours that the Nazis themselves were responsible for the fire. Clearly he wasn’t alone in finding it odd that the brownshirts should be so up in arms about the blaze when they’d spent years referring to the building as a talking shop. Knowing the Scherl-Verlag would remove such things from his copy, he had concentrated on making his story as exciting as possible, and his vivid, sensationalist portrayal had drawn praise from all sides.
   And resulted in his own desk.
   It had been a holiday cover at first, but now that he had his foot in the door, he had a chance to show what he could do, and there was no point grumbling about gathering election results. He had been assigned Electoral District 7, which roughly corresponded to the administrative region of Breslau. The Scherl-Verlag had people everywhere to carry the preliminary results back to the editorial office in Berlin. Meanwhile the office was staffed with people like Weinert, who noted everything that came over the wires and used it to compile a series of tables, which were then made available to political editors.
   It was vital he didn’t get above his station. He had already shown that he could not only write stories, but break them himself. The business with the dead homeless man and the pigeons had caused quite a stir. A number of papers, some of them more respectable thanDer Tag, had picked up the scoop.
   The telephone rang for a fourth time. His pre-printed form was gradually filling with numbers. No sooner had he hung up than it rang again.‘Ward name?’ he said. Four down, twenty to go; it would be a long night. Perhaps when it was over he’d have a drink with colleagues. It couldn’t hurt. ‘Weinert here, ward name please,’ he repeated.
   ‘Berlin Alexanderplatz,’ said the man on the other end.
   ‘Gereon!’ Weinert said, barely concealing his astonishment. ‘How did you get this number?’
   ‘I’m a police officer.’
   ‘We’ll have to chat another time. Right now, counting is in full swing and…’
   ‘I didn’t realise you had a permanent position again.’
   ‘An editor went to take the waters in Karlsbad.’
   ‘Some people are better off abroad.’
   ‘It’s good of you to call, but the timing’s all wrong. We’re blocking a line here.’
   ‘Speaking of right and wrong. How about using someone as an informant without their prior knowledge?’
   ‘You meanher prior knowledge.’
   ‘Then you know what I’m talking about.’
   ‘We ran into one another at the Reichstag and went on to a bar in Friedrichstrasse. We hadn’t seen each other in a long time. It’s normal to say what you’re up to.’
   ‘Is it normal to do the dirty afterwards?’
   ‘I didn’t do the dirty on Charly, just on Böhm. I thought you couldn’t stand the man.’
   ‘He’s a demigod as far as Charly’s concerned. She’s inconsolable and blames herself for everything.’
   ‘For what?’
   ‘Böhm was transferred.’
   ‘You’re not serious.’
   ‘The investigation you made fun of was shelved by the powers-that-be. Thing is, it was my investigation too.’
   ‘What can I say? The power of the press. Sometimes it surprises even me.’
   ‘You could have told Charly you were going to write about the dead tramp.’
   ‘I didn’t know I was. It wasn’t until I mentioned Böhm’s name that my boss’s ears pricked up. Gereon, I was forced to write that article!’ That was a slight exaggeration, but Weinert didn’t want to risk losing Gereon Rath as a contact. ‘Besides, I couldn’t have been that far off,or the other papers wouldn’t have followed suit.’
   ‘Well, they all had a great time. You know the canvasses were partly Charly’s idea?’
   ‘The pigeon business?’
   ‘It might sound stupid, but in the end it worked.’
   ‘I’m sorry, Gereon. I really didn’t mean…’
   ‘You should be sorry. You owe me one.’
   ‘Any time. Give me the information and I’ll write your story, just like old times…’
   Weinert heard someone clearing their throat and turned around. Harald Hefner, the tall senior duty editor, stood behind him with furrowed brow.‘Are you engaging in private conversations?’
   ‘An informant.’ Weinert placed his hand over the mouthpiece.
   ‘Put them off. You’re here for the election results. Don’t get above yourself!’
   ‘Of course not.’ Weinert hung up. He was about to say something else, when the telephone rang again, announcing the results from the rural district of Strehlen. He sighed and reached for his pencil.
   35
   ‘Shhh,’ Charly hissed, as Gereon entered the living room. She waved her arms, hoping he’d understand, and he did. Or rather, he grinned, placed his fingers to his lips and tiptoed exaggeratedly towards his armchair. Couldn’t he take her seriously, just this once? The ten o’clock news was being broadcast on the Berliner Funkstunde, and Charly’s ears were glued to the radiogramophone. Kirie sat beside her, tilting her head as if interested in what the loudspeaker had to say, but now Gereon arrived she pitter-pattered over to greet him.
   Charly seldom listened to the radio, though more often than Gereon, who only used it to play his records. Switching it on, she had pushed the transmit button until the rustling and buzzing became a voice holding forth on the subject ofAcademics and Unemployment. After that it had been music, famous operetta melodies. No word on the election until the news, but they were making up for it now. Typical Gereon, to burst in at precisely the wrong moment.
   Voting in Berlin had gone off peacefully for the most part, the speaker announced, something Charly had difficulty believing – unless they meant the kind of deathly peacefulness associated with a graveyard. Then came the preliminary results.
   ‘The National Socialists,’ the announcer said, ‘seventeen point two million votes. Two hundred-and-eighty-eight seats.’
   Charly started at the figure, though she felt relieved at the same time.‘At least it’s not an absolute majority,’ she said. ‘Hitler still needs Papen and company to govern.’ Despite everything, Hitler’s coalition partners from the Kampfbund Schwarz-Weiss-Rot hadn’t achieved more than three million votes.
   Even so, the Nazi defeat that many had hoped for failed to materialise. On the contrary, they had gained almost six million votes. The Social Democrats remained on seven point something million, while the Centre Party had also improved slightly, their share now standing at almost four and a half. As for the Communists, though their newspapers were banned and they had been forbidden from holding campaign rallies, they’d still collected almost five million votes.
   That was something. When she thought of all the threats outside polling stations, the Communists who had been arrested in the preceding weeks… The news moved onto the weather, and she rose from in front of the radiogramophone.
   ‘Aren’t you going to say hello to the birthday boy?’ Gereon grinned from his armchair. He had fetched a glass and poured from the bottle Charly had opened.
   ‘Sorry,’ she said. ‘I had to listen to that.’
   It was polling day in the Prussian state parliament too. The results followed the Reichstag vote, but they didn’t interest her as much. The only thing she cared about was whether the Hitler government would have parliamentary support in future, and it would.
   ‘At least the Nazis can’t just do whatever they want,’ Gereon said. ‘They have to govern with Papen.’
   ‘Papen does whatever they want.’
   ‘To think the man used to be a Centrist. In the same party as my father and Adenauer!’
   ‘At some point Papen and his gang are going to have to wake up. Or Hindenburg, at least. It’s about time he put a stop to this madness.’
   ‘He will, for sure.’ Gereon glanced at the wristwatch Charly had gifted him that morning. ‘Let’s say in… four hundred and thirty-seven hours and five minutes. Starting… now!’
   He smiled at her. He was such a child, but at least he liked his new watch. She had saved half a year for it.‘No offence, Gereon, but right now I don’t feel much like joking.’ Even so, she couldn’t help but smile as he danced towards her like a gigolo manqué. In the meantime the radio was playing music again, dance music from the Femina-Bar.
   He took her by the hand and led her in a dance across the carpet while Kirie looked on curiously.‘Life goes on! At some point the Nazi government will collapse, and a new one will take its place.’
   ‘If there’s anyone in the country still worth voting for.’
   ‘Personally I can do without the Communists. Moscow’s welcome to them. Do you really want to be governed by that lot? They’d have our likes up against a wall.’
   ‘The Nazis aren’t just striking at the Communists. Do you have even the faintest notion of what is happening in this city?’
   Their little dance was over.‘More than the faintest notion, and I’m telling you all this will blow over.’
   Not for the first time she was bewildered by his naiveté. She told him what had happened little more than four hours ago, hoping it might open his eyes. He listened in silence, until the part where the uniformed cop lifted the police cordon.
   ‘The SA stormed Dr Weiss’s apartment?’ he asked in disbelief.
   ‘Yes and, God knows, he’s no Communist.’
   ‘What happened?’
   ‘Thank God they didn’t get him. They had to vent their anger on the furniture.’
   ‘How do you know? Were you inside?’
   She shook her head and told him how she had paced up and down Uhlandstrasse with Kirie because she couldn’t go home or face spending another minute with her idle colleagues. How suddenly she’d seen a familiar face emerge from a doorway. The relief she had felt on seeing him there, unharmed and with his wife. Bernhard Weiss gestured discreetly for her to keep walking. There were still SA officers afew metres away on Steinplatz. Only when they reached Pension Teske did the Weisses finally stop. ‘Fräulein Ritter,’ Charly’s one-time boss had said, ‘tell my brother that we are safe for the time being.’
   ‘What about your daughter?’
   ‘Hilde too. Tell my brother not to worry.’
   Charly shook him and his wife by the hand.‘I wish you all the best, Sir. See that you don’t fall into the hands of the brown mob.’
   Then she made towards Adolf Weiss’s apartment, a few doors further down, and redeemed her pledge.
   ‘Weiss only escaped,’ she concluded her report, ‘because the SA were too stupid to station a guard outside the service entrance.’ She nodded towards the radio. ‘Yet the whole hideous episode doesn’t receive so much as a mention. According to the Funkstunde, the vote passed off peacefully.’
   ‘Well, nothing happened,’ Gereon said, in another clumsy attempt to pacify her.
   ‘Nothing happened?’ she said, careful not to shout. ‘Only because Weiss escaped in time, or he might be dead by now!’
   ‘It’s all right,’ he said and took her in his arms. ‘I didn’t mean it like that. You’re right.’
   Suddenly she was just glad he was home, and that she wasn’t alone anymore. The radio played jazz music from the Femina-Bar, as if it were an evening like any other.
   36
   Erwin Zientek was at his desk when Rath arrived on Monday morning.
   ‘Not exactly quick off the mark, are you?’
   ‘I had to drop off my dog. In A Division.’
   ‘Police dog, is it?’
   ‘My secretary’s looking after her. I thought she’d get in the way here.’ He hung his hat on the hook. ‘So what is it today?’
   ‘What do you think? We pick up where we left off. Find a free interrogation room and start grilling Communists.’
   ‘The election’s over,’ Rath said, sitting at the desk Zientek had assigned him. ‘Why carry on?’
   ‘The election might be over, but the SA are still dredging up Communists – must be a nest somewhere.’ Zientek laughed at his joke. ‘Why do you think Dr Braschwitz requested so many CID officers? Because we love you boys so much? No, it’s because there are so many of you and so few of us.’
   The detective’s lack of respect was starting to grate.
   ‘There are more Reds in this city than you might think,’ Zientek continued. ‘Did you see how many votes they got?’ He inhaled deeply, revealing yellowed teeth as he breathed out. ‘We’re interrogating every Communist going, in the hope of finding something Dr Braschwitz and the public prosecutor can use in court against van der Lubbe, Torgler and their co-conspirators.’
   ‘So it is a conspiracy?’
   ‘You think this Dutchman was out to grill a sausage?’
   What the hell had he got himself into? He’d been careful not to breathe a word of how he’d spent his Sunday to Charly. Though she moaned about the Communists just as much as she did about the Nazis, there was no way she’d condone what he was doing with Zientek.
   Communist threat or not, he was starting to feel uneasy about it himself. In his long years of service he had never been part of an interrogation marathon like this. The SA had actually been fetching people from outside polling stations – before they had a chance to vote. Time and again auxiliary police officers brought in people who weren’t even on Zientek’s list.
   Mind you, the Communistshad lost a good million votes since November. Within weeks, the new government had gained control of the Commune, nullifying the threat of a Red putsch. Germany was as far from civil war as it had been in a long time, but equally far from a functional democracy.
   Rath thought of Charly and her vanishing hopes that the Republic might be saved. She had been in a strange mood this morning as she stepped out of the car and entered headquarters, head awhirl with dark thoughts. If he hadn’t called her back in the stairwell she’d have forgotten to kiss him as they went their separate ways. Which in his case meant the Political Police, Section 1A.
   ‘Let’s get on,’ he said, making no effort to conceal his temper. ‘Who’s next?’
   ‘We’re still waiting for the list.’
   It wasn’t long before it arrived. To Rath’s surprise he knew the man who brought it in.
   ‘Lange, what are you doing here?’
   Andreas Lange had previously worked as an assistant detective in Homicide before starting his inspector training in the same intake as Charly.
   ‘Inspector!’ Lange placed the list on Rath’s desk. He, too, seemed pleased to see a familiar face. ‘I’ve been with the Political Police since December. Didn’t you know?’
   ‘Right. Of course.’ Gennat had almost certainly announced the news while Rath’s mind had been elsewhere. ‘How do you like it on the upstairs floor?’
   ‘Better view for sure,’ Lange said, and went on his way.
   ‘You can always tell CID officers,’ Zientek said. ‘Comedians…’ He had made a disappointed face as Lange set down the list on Rath’s desk, but couldn’t say anything given Rath’s status as superior officer. ‘Let’s go and find an interrogation room,’ he said, snatching the list gruffly and making for the door. Rath followed, smiling inwardly but hurrying to keep up.
   ‘These lists,’ he asked. ‘Where are they compiled?’
   ‘Pardon me?’
   ‘Is there a central list containing the names of all prisoners being held by the police and auxiliary forces?’
   ‘There might be, if the SA weren’t so damn sloppy, but every so often a prisoner slips through, never to be found. Their prisons are a mess.’
   ‘The SA have their own prisons? Since when?’
   ‘Where do you think all this lot are kept? Berlin doesn’t have that many free cells.’
   ‘But the SA does?’
   ‘You can be sure of it.’
   ‘What kind of prisons are these?’
   ‘For the most part they’re normal basements, though sometimes they cart Thälmann’s boys off to the nearest Sturmlokal to teach them some manners. Which means their record-keeping isn’t quite what it could be. Still, Commies can be dealt with off the books too.’ Zientek laughed, sounding like a goat with pneumonia.
   ‘Say you’re looking for someone specific, how would you find them?’
   ‘The men on our list are all brought in from elsewhere. Shouldn’t be much looking involved.’
   ‘What if they haven’t been brought in yet?’
   Zientek halted outside the interrogation room. He seemed wary.‘If you’re looking for someone specific we can submit a request to SA leadership. Usually they’re delivered the next day. Free of charge.’ He laughed his bleating laugh. ‘Occasionally they can be a little worse for wear. Which is hardly the worst thing for our purposes.’
   37
   He still didn’t know why he had been locked up or what they intended to do with him.
   They weren’t going to beat him to death. They had kicked him and thrashed him with an iron bar, but always stopped just in time. Luckily for Leo, he could take a lot of punishment. He wouldn’t break any time soon, and that, he now believed, was their purpose. They wanted to cut him down a peg, make an example of a head of a Ringverein. To deter other career criminals in the city.
   The rest of the inmates were nobodies. Communists mainly, as well as a few Social Democrats who had been taken out of circulation. Also, doctors, authors and lawyers who were united, besides their high school diplomas and university degrees, above all, by being Jewish. Some of them had long forgotten this fact until the SA reminded them.
   In the meantime Leo also knew where he was being held, albeit this information was of little use as he had no contact with the outside world. The SA must have only just moved into the former barracks on General-Pape-Strasse since the whole thing retained an improvised feel. The prisoners were herded together in the basement. Thirty or forty men in the one room with only a single steel trough for their toilet, emptied all too infrequently given their captors’ fondness for the castor oil treatment.
   Upstairs, the offices and interrogation rooms were a world apart from this basement hell. There were beatings upstairs, too, but the really sadistic torture was carried out by the SA men downstairs, almost all of them in their early or mid-twenties.
   Other buildings were also in use, though they housed normal enterprises. From time to time Leo would hear the screeching of a saw, the pounding of hammer on metal alongside footsteps, cries, laughter and the murmur of voices. Berlin workers going about their business as the SA tortured their most vocal supporters in the basement next door.
   The Communists, who made up the majority of prisoners, managed to smuggle out the odd message. They were well organised, but didn’t trust Leo, the Ringverein man, which meant he hadn’t got word to Marlow. Whether someone like Dr Kohn, Marlow’s go-to weapon in such cases, would be much help in a situation like this remained to be seen. What happened down here had nothing to do with the rule of law. Besides, wasn’t Kohn Jewish himself? There was more chance of him joining Leo than bailing him out.
   A key turned in the lock.‘Juretzka, follow me!’
   Leo stood up. His bones ached, he had bumps and bruises everywhere, and in some places the skin had burst open. His wounds had only just started to heal, and now the bastards would open them again. Since encountering Katsche on the first day, he had begun memorising his torturers’ faces, storing names whenever they were mentioned, as well as any other information he could lay his hands on. If he should ever get out, he’d find them all, no matter where they lived or where they were hiding. Katsche above all, the piece of shit.
   He’d only seen him on the first day, but he was almost certain that Horst Kaczmarek had denounced him, perhaps on behalf of the Nordpiraten. Apparently Marczewski had seen Lapke, the head of the Pirates, taking part in an SA rally in Wedding sometime in November. He’d been right in the midst of it, dressed in brown.
   Leo blinked as they stepped into the light. They were taking him upstairs. That was good. There would be no messing around with castor oil, or anything that involved severe blood loss. They saved that for the basement.
   It was the first time they’d taken him upstairs in daylight. For the first time he could see something on the other side of the windows, a gravel yard where a few cars were stationed. Two men in workers’ overalls leaned by the wall of a brick building and smoked. Outside a large gate a truck waited to be loaded. It really was business as usual. Did the workers realise who had moved in next door?
   Behind the desk was a man whom the two guards addressed as Sturmführer Sperling. It was the first time Leo had seen him, but he noted his face, and his name. He was less concerned about the man’s rank, though evidently he was a big fish.
   ‘Prisoner Juretzka,’ Sperling said. ‘You will be pleased to know that we are preparing your release.’
   ‘Then you’ve finally realised I’m not a Communist. Congratulations. It only took you six days, or was it seven?’
   ‘There are plenty of reasons to hold you a little longer. You have one man, and one man alone, to thank for your release. Scharführer Lapke put in…’
   ‘Come again?’ Leo interrupted the Sturmführer, paying for it with a truncheon blow to the ribs.
   ‘No need to thank me,’ a voice said from the door. Leo turned around and couldn’t believe his eyes. Hermann Lapke, the head of the Nordpiraten, stood in the doorway, but even in SA uniform the man looked more like a grey, middle-class bore than a gangster. The whole world underestimated him, the underworld above all.
   ‘That sort of thing goes without saying, doesn’t it, Leo?’ Lapke said. ‘What’s a good word between friends?’
   Leo spat.‘I can do without you.’
   Lapke leaned casually on the desk, downgrading Sturmführer Sperling, his superior, to a bit-part role.
   ‘I don’t think youcan. If you really want to get out of here, I’m the only who can save you.’
   ‘Why would you want to save me, Lapke?’
   ‘It isn’t out of the goodness of my heart.’ He looked Leo in the eye. ‘Think of it as a small token for disbanding Berolina and transferring your men to me. I promise I’ll look after them.’
   ‘Berolina has existed for more than thirty years, and you wantme to disband it?’
   ‘The Ringvereine are history anyway. Wake up, Leo! There’s no place for them in the new Germany.’
   ‘But there is a place for the Pirates? Are you trying to tell me you’renot a Ringverein?’
   ‘The Nordpiraten have recognised the mood of the times. They’ll continue to do business long after Berolina has disappeared.’
   ‘That’s what you dream of each night? I always wanted to know what you jerked yourself off to.’
   Lapke turned to Sperling, who sat behind the desk as before.‘I thought you’d softened him up. Still has a pretty big mouth on him.’
   ‘We haven’t released him yet,’ Sperling said, examining his fingernails. ‘We can always soften him up a little more.’
   Damn it, Leo thought.For once in your life, just keep it shut.
   Lapke continued.‘Mark my words, Leo. Soon you’ll do exactly as I say.’
   Leo said nothing. They wouldn’t get to Vera. If she was smart, she’d have skipped town already – as he’d told her to if there was ever trouble with the Pirates or the cops. Were they planning on beating him to death? Then someone else would take his place. Berolina wouldn’t let itself be crushed like that. They had managed just fine after Red Hugo’s death.
   Lapke gave Sperling a wave and reached for the telephone.‘Round up the prisoners. Tell SA officer Kaczmarek we need him after all.’
   Sothat was their secret weapon, Leo thought. Thugs like Katsche had never bothered him in the past. The two SA men who had led him upstairs yanked him from the chair and dragged him back down into the basement. Leo told himself things might get bloody, but he was just as sure they wouldn’t kill him.
   ‘Phew! It stinks down here,’ he heard Lapke say, a few steps behind. ‘Did you shit yourself already, Leo?’
   ‘Maybe if you shut your mouth, the smell wouldn’t be so bad.’ He felt a truncheon in his side, but he didn’t care anymore.
   Down in the basement Horst Kaczmarek waited with a morbid grin. Behind him the prisoners stood in rank and file. They had even fetched the women from their cells. Everyone looked anxiously towards Leo and company. A good dozen SA officers stood alongside, arms folded, gazing out of curious, sceptical eyes.
   ‘Hello Katsche,’ Leo said. ‘I hear you want to dance. Didn’t realise it was ladies’ choice.’
   ‘Very funny. Shall I land him one, chief?’
   Lapke shook his head and lit a cigarette.‘No, no, Katsche. It’s time for your party trick. You have your audience, and a volunteer.’
   Katsche took off his uniform cap and handed it to one of his comrades.‘Hold him,’ he said, and the grip of the SA officers on either side grew tighter.
   Katsche swept a strand of hair from his forehead and approached, mouth almost at eye level. Then he seized Leo’s head with both hands, so suddenly and unexpectedly that Leo barely knew what was happening. Katsche pressed his fleshy lips on Leo’s right eye, as if leaning in for a kind of warped kiss. Instinctively Leo had closed his eyes, but even so he felt the suction, an unbelievable force that triggered a searing pain in his head, directly behind his eye. Katsche sucked with all his might, and the pain grew. Leo’s eyelid began to flutter. He tried to escape the awful suction, but Katsche held his head for all he was worth, the brownshirts held his arms and legs, and then everything happened impossibly fast. There was a kind of plop, and Leo’s eye slid out of its socket. Katsche clenched his teeth, and a sharp pain shot through Leo’s head, worse than anything he’d experienced before. He screamed, but it was no good.
   Katsche detached himself and spat. Leo heard a few men jeer and applaud. Most were speechless.
   He screamed and turned into the arms of his captors, but they held him fast. Warm blood ran from his right eye socket down his cheek; the left eye, still intact, was weeping, and through the blur of tears and pain Leo caught sight of something on the concrete floor. A little ball streaked with blood. He needed a moment to understand what it was that lay there like a bloody marble. The optic nerve hung from its blood-smeared eyeball like an umbilical cord. Only after this realisation, which shot through him like dark lightning, did the pain die enough for him to faint.
   38
   Rath never thought he would see the man again, but here he was. A gaunt figure slumped on the chair opposite with vomit in his goatee beard, and the cheekbone under his left eye swollen. But it was him, no doubt about it.
   ‘Dr Völcker, Peter, Neukölln,’ the guard announced, as he led the Communist doctor in from the cells.
   Völcker hört die Signale. So comrades, come rally. For some reason Rath remembered this sentence from years before. Dr Peter Völcker, Communist and member of Neukölln district council, was an arrogant trouble-maker who never stopped insisting on ‘rights’, and had thus driven many an officer to the brink of despair.
   Nothing remained of that man. The only despair came from Völcker himself. Rath felt ashamed, and was relieved that the Communist doctor, with whom he had quarrelled in a mortuary car during the May riots of 1929, didn’t recognise him.
   This was his fourth day working alongside Erwin Zientek and already his new partner was driving him up the wall. With each Communist interrogated Rath felt more alienated. They had to be finished soon. He was starting to feel as if he knew every KPD member in Berlin. Couldn’t Gennat take on a homicide that demanded the recall of his men? Rath was almost willing to commit it himself!
   He still stopped by A Division every morning to leave Kirie with Erika Voss, before making his way upstairs. On one occasion Erika mentioned a message from Warrants, and he’d prayed it was something important, a response from the Reichswehr perhaps, or some witness that necessitated his immediate return from 1A, but all they had done was pick up the trail of the fugitive girl. If he understood correctly, a nightshirt had been found in a wastepaper basket belonging to the Jonass Department store. The girl had nothing to do with the Wosniak investigation.
   As if that wasn’t enough, his work with the Political Police still hadn’t helped him establish the whereabouts of Long Leo Juretzka.
   Right now, however, that was the least of his concerns. His problem was that he felt so utterly ashamed in front of the broken Communist doctor. He felt caught out, almost as if Charly were looking on with disapproval. He still hadn’t told her how he was spending his days. ‘Interrogations,’ he had said, the one time she’d attempted to probe. ‘I’ll be glad to get back to Gennat at last.’
   Like the many others who had sat before him on this chair, Dr Völcker’s only crime was to be a member of the KPD. It was becoming increasingly clear to Rath that there was no Communist conspiracy. If, as Charly claimed, even Rudolf Diels, the head of the Political Police, thought the Dutchman had acted alone, then why all the games? For the sake of Göring,who needed additional suspects for the trial, or simply to further intimidate the Communists? Most of them seemed pretty intimidated already. Peter Völcker, whom Rath remembered as a serious pain in the arse, perched on his chair with all resistance beaten out of him. Even then he wasn’t about to admit to a conspiracy that didn’t exist.
   The interrogation – during which Rath held back as usual and handed the floor to Zientek – had just finished when the telephone rang. To Rath’s surprise it was his secretary. ‘Erika? Is something the matter with Kirie?’
   ‘Please excuse the interruption, Sir. I have someone on the line who simply won’t let go. It’s at least the fifth time he’s called. He’s even threatened to stop by in person if you refuse to speak to him.’
   ‘Please tell me it isn’t our Baron von Roddeck.’
   ‘No.’ Rath was relieved, if only for a fraction of a second. ‘A Herr Frank,’ Erika Voss continued. ‘Neue Preussische Zeitung. I don’t know what more I can say to him.’
   ‘I hope you didn’t tell him I’ve been seconded to the Politicals.’
   ‘Of course not.’
   ‘Patch him through to Detective Zientek’s office, extension…’
   ‘I have the number.’
   ‘Great. There in ten seconds.’
   ‘Important call,’ he said to Zientek, shrugging his shoulders apologetically. ‘Back in a moment.’
   Zientek scowled, but said nothing.
   The telephone was already ringing by the time Rath entered the detective’s office. ‘Rath, CID,’ he said.
   ‘Frank,Neue Preussische Zeitung. You’re a hard man to get hold of, Inspector.’
   ‘I’ve been busy.’
   ‘That’s why I’m calling. I wondered if you had anything new to report?’
   ‘How do you mean?’
   ‘Serialisation ofMärzgefallene begins next week. We’ve been promoting it daily, as perhaps you’ve seen. I wanted to ask how things were progressing with the investigation, on behalf of Lieutenant von Roddeck.’
   ‘Why doesn’t Roddeck get in touch himself?’
   ‘Like I say, you’re a hard man to reach. Lieutenant von Roddeck is surprised not to have been summoned for a second interview.’
   ‘I have his novel, don’t I? The details are all inside.’
   ‘You have a lead on Captain Engel?’
   ‘I’m afraid it isn’t that simple. The man will almost certainly have assumed a new identity. If, that is, Herr Roddeck’s suspicions are correct, and he survived the war.’
   ‘You’re casting doubt on the word of a Prussian lieutenant?’
   ‘Lieutenant Roddeck has merely voiced a suspicion, and so long as we have nothing concrete to go on, we will continue to pursue all avenues. Your mysterious phantom, a man who was actually declareddead, isn’t top of our list.’
   ‘Inspector, I must say this is most unsatisfactory.’
   ‘I’m sorry I can’t provide more detail,’ Rath lied. ‘Give Herr Roddeck my regards, and tell him I will be in touch as soon as I have more to go on.’
   He hung up and lit a cigarette. Returning to the interrogation room and the latest Communist held little appeal. He stayed where he was behind Zientek’s desk, looking out of the window at the grey winter sky, smoking and thinking about the last few days. In the meantime he understood all too well why Charly had lost her sense of motivation. Not that they spoke about it. In all the years they had known one another, they had probably never exchanged fewer words about work. They finished on time, met for lunch in the canteen, drove together to and from Alex. In short: they did the same as millions of others who regarded their jobs as a means of earning money, and nothing more.
   Work aside, things between them were great. Since clearing the air last week, they had spent every night together, taken Kirie for walks, listened to music, drank and talked, sometimes even danced, and at the end of it all they wound up in bed, more often than not on the tipsy side. It was almost as if they wished to sever their ties with the world outside, and escape the drabness of routine.
   He was about to stub out his cigarette when there was a knock on the door. A guard looked in.‘Inspector Rath?’
   ‘Yes?’
   ‘There’s an SA commando here from Papestrasse. Apparently you requested a prisoner Juretzka?’
   The man who was led in moments later by two brownshirts made a pitiful impression. There were blood-encrusted wounds above his left cheekbone and on his forehead, flanked by bruises. A huge bandage was draped over his right eye. The left eye was even worse, its gaze so dead it was as if the man’s soul had already departed.
   The papers submitted by the higher-ranking SA man, a Scharführer, left Rath in no doubt that the poor bastard in front of him was Leopold Juretzka, nicknamed Long Leo, Red Hugo’s successor as head of the Berolina Ringverein, or what was left of it.
   He soon abandoned any hope that he might be able to speak to Juretzka in private, let alone secure his release and have him returned to Marlow.‘We have orders to transport the prisoner back to Papestrasse immediately on completion of the interrogation,’ the Scharführer said.
   ‘Looks like he’d be better off in the sick bay. What on earth happened?’
   ‘Lost his right eye. An unfortunate fall.’
   Onto what? An SA dagger?
   The door opened, and Detective Zientek poked his head inside.‘I was starting to worry, Inspector.’
   ‘The SA have brought in another prisoner.’
   ‘Prisoner Juretzka, Leopold,’ the Scharführer said, looking at his docket. So the SA did keep records after all. Or, at least, they were starting to… ‘Requested by Inspector Rath, Gereon.’ There went any story he might hatch for Zientek’s benefit.
   ‘I received a tip-off from one of my informants.’ He hoped this bland explanation might get rid of Zientek, but the detective proved just as stubborn as the two SA officers.
   ‘Let us know if you need any support, Inspector,’ the Scharführer said, as he and his colleague shunted Juretzka onto the chair and took up position behind it. No doubt where they came from, a well-directed blow was as good as a line of questioning.
   Five of them were packed into Zientek’s already cramped office, all eagerly awaiting Rath’s next move. He had no idea what he might ask, only that it wouldn’t be what he was dying to know.
   Who did this to you?
   What do these bastards want?
   Should I put Johann Marlow onto them?
   The only person who didn’t seem interested in Rath’s questions was Leopold Juretzka. The man sat on his chair staring blankly ahead with his one remaining eye as if there were no one else in the room. Or, as if he weren’t there himself, merely his body, and his spirit were elsewhere, out of reach of the police, the SA or whoever.
   ‘You are Leopold Juretzka?’ Rath began. No response. No change in expression. ‘Answer, please! Your name is Juretzka, Leopold Juretzka?’ Silence, dead gaze.
   He attempted another two or three questions, which elicited just as little response, then gave up.‘This man is not fit for questioning,’ he said to the SA officers. ‘What did you do to him?’
   ‘Like I said. He took an unfortunate tumble. Our steps have iron edges.’
   ‘And that’s how he lost his sight?’
   ‘Who’s being interrogated here, Inspector?’
   ‘Herr Juretzka is an important witness in a homicide inquiry,’ Rath lied. ‘I don’t know the reasons for his arrest, but I must ask that you hand him over to CID, and see that his fitness for questioning be restored.’ Somehow, he had to free this wretch from SA clutches.
   The SA men looked crestfallen. They hadn’t realised their prisoner was so important.
   ‘A homicide inquiry?’ Zientek stood up. ‘Inspector, might I remind you that these are the offices of thePolitical Police…’
   ‘No need,’ Rath responded so brusquely that his colleague fell silent. ‘I didn’t ask for Herr Juretzka to be senthere, but A Division. If you wish to complain, I suggest you take it up with the SA!’
   Zientek’s gaze flitted between the brownshirts and Rath, as if wondering who to pick a fight with: a CID inspector or auxiliary officers who had powerful backers of their own. At length he resolved to sit down. ‘There is no way this man is fit for questioning. I agree with you there.’
   Rath was glad of the support, even if Zientek’s motive clearly lay in being rid of the SA and their prisoner as soon as possible, so that he could continue working through the list of Communists. Erwin Zientek, Rath had observed, was a police officer who liked to finish on time.
   ‘As I said, this man belongs in a hospital,’ Rath said.
   ‘We’re under strict orders to return the prisoner to Papestrasse,’ the Scharführer grumbled.
   ‘You have an infirmary there?’
   ‘No, but…’
   ‘ThenI order that he be taken to hospital. Under close supervision. I’ll hold you personally responsible if Prisoner Juretzka doesn’t return here fit for questioning within three days.’
   The Scharführer stood to attention. ‘Aye, aye, Sir!’
   Time and again Rath was astonished at the effect of a few barked instructions. Pretend you were on the parade ground and even the unruly Berliners clicked their heels. The Scharführer stepped forward, unfolded the docket and set it on the desk.
   ‘What am I supposed to do with that?’ Rath asked.
   ‘I need a signature, Sir, to certify that we delivered the prisoner to headquarters…’ His finger moved to the second column. ‘… and here to confirm your instruction that he be taken to hospital.’
   A quarter of an hour later, Rath sat in Gennat’s outer office and felt his stomach rumble. Trudchen Steiner, Buddha’s long-standing secretary, was heating up sausages. A large pot steamed on the electric stove in the corner of the room.
   ‘Can you hold the fort for a moment, Zientek?’ Rath had said, after the SA men had departed with the unfortunate Juretzka. ‘I need to inform Superintendent Gennat.’
   ‘Fine. So long as it doesn’t become a habit.’
   A response like that, Rath wondered why he had bothered to ask.
   It was almost lunch by the time Gennat could see him.‘Just a moment of your time, Sir.’
   He was invited to sit on the green sofa. There was no cake, and no sausage either. Rath was brief and to the point.
   ‘You want your old case back?’ Gennat asked, and Rath nodded. Buddha furrowed his brow. ‘Your plan does you credit, Inspector, but it isn’t as simple as that.’
   ‘I never said it was, Sir, but you should know that this needless interrogation of Communists can continue without our support. Most are either in custody or have been interrogated already. There can no longer be any question of a Red threat.’
   ‘We are in agreement there, but the commissioner will see things differently.’ Buddha shrugged his heavy shoulders. ‘You’re not the only man I’ve loaned to 1A, and, believe me, you’re not the only one who wants out. I speak with Herr von Levetzow every day to request my men back, but it’s tricky.’
   ‘I understand that several men have been recalled.’
   ‘Fornew investigations. Resurrecting a case that’s been shelved is nigh-on impossible.’
   ‘Try, at least.’
   ‘I am trying, Inspector. Every day, but I don’t want you to get your hopes up.’
   Rath went to the door and tipped his hat.‘Please excuse the interruption, Sir.’
   At least he hadn’t sacrificed his entire lunchbreak. After a brief turn with Kirie, he went to Aschinger to pick up a few Bouletten and made for a free telephone booth at Alexanderplatz train station. He was in luck: Weinert was still at his desk.
   39
   It seemed barely credible that Köpenick was part of Berlin. The S-Bahn terminus was in Spindlersfeld, meaning Charly had to cover the remaining distance by foot.
   Gereon’s car might have made things easier, but she hadn’t mentioned her trip to him. No one was to know. She had feigned illness again to Karin, and by now it was scarcely a lie. She actually felt sick when she arrived for work in the morning, to be greeted by her colleague’s goggle eyes, her blissful smile and her idotic, naive remarks. As for what lay on her desk…
   Köpenick Police Station was in the 241st precinct. Schönlinder Strasse, ten minutes’ walk from the S-Bahn. The man at the gate couldn’t help, or didn’t want to. ‘Böhm, you say?’
   ‘Detective Chief Inspector Böhm. Probably been here a week now.’
   ‘Chief inspector? Highest-ranking officer is Detective Brenner.’
   ‘Brenner? Then take me to him.’
   ‘Aren’t you easy to beat down? Chief inspector to detective in three seconds.’
   He told her where Brenner’s office was and she knocked. The man behind the desk looked familiar. Frank Brenner had worked as a detective inspector at Alex a few years back, before disciplinary proceedings set him on a different path.
   ‘Detective Brenner,’ she said.
   The man looked up and raised his eyebrows.‘If it isn’t young Ritter. What brings you here?’
   ‘Cadet Ritter wishes to speak with Officer Böhm.’
   ‘One of your fellow trainees?’
   Charly forced a smile.‘I only know he works here. I was passing and wanted to pay him a visit.’
   ‘You were passing Köpenick? It isn’t often you hear that.’
   Charly shrugged.‘A girlfriend.’
   She didn’t know a soul in Köpenick; she’d last driven through sometime in summer on her return from the Müggelsee. For some reason she’d never actually stopped here, though it was quite pretty with its waterfront, castle and old town, and its town hall, where a simple shoemaker had once shown the Prussians and the world where blind obedience can lead.
   ‘A girlfriend, I see. Then Wilhelm Böhm isa boyfriend…’
   ‘An old colleague. As you know. Don’t you want to tell me where he is?’
   ‘I do, I do.’ Brenner chewed on his cigar. ‘But I’m afraid he’s no longer here.’
   ‘Has he been transferred back to Alex?’
   ‘No, of course he hasn’t.’ Brenner was enjoying stalling her.
   ‘Then where might I find him?’
   ‘Police academy,’ Brenner said. ‘We found a new role for him there. In here… how can I put it? He had difficulties accepting who was in charge. I had no choice but to act.’
   Charly refused to give Brenner’s remarks the time of day. ‘Police academy… How do I get there?’
   Brenner gave her an appraising look.‘It’s a bit of a trek on foot,’ he said. ‘Kaiser-Wilhelm-Strasse. A good three kilometres.’
   ‘I’ll take a taxi,’ Charly said, shouldering her bag.
   As she reached the door, Brenner piped up again.‘Officer Schneider will be heading out shortly. He’ll drive you.’
   A little while later Charly sat on the rear seat of a green Police Opel as she was driven through Köpenick in the company of two taciturn men. They crossed the winter-grey Dahme, heading northbound past the town hall to the railway station and eventually turning left. The police academy on Kaiser-Wilhelm-Strasse was a bright new building, as if by dint of its architecture it might produce a generation of bright new officers. The whole site was an expression of hope for an era already in terminal decline. A swastika flag adorned the facade, more out of place here than on any other building in the city.
   The Opel parked in the yard. Charly heard a train thundering across the tracks nearby. Her companions stepped silently out of the car.‘So, where can I find Chief Inspector Böhm?’ she asked.
   The elder of the pair, Schneider, replied, breaking out in whinnying laughter.‘Best ask at the gate.’ He and his colleague were still laughing as they disappeared inside the building.
   Reaching the door, Charly realised what was so funny. The man reading a newspaper behind the glass of the porter’s lodge was certainly overqualified. Detective Chief Inspector Wilhelm Böhm, one of the most established and reliable members of Gennat’s Homicide Division, had been assigned porter duties in Köpenick Police Academy. They had even given him oversleeves. Or did he wear them out of choice?
   For a moment Charly regretted her decision to visit, Böhm was clearly embarrassed to be seen like this. He cleared his throat as she approached the glass.
   ‘Sir,’ she said.
   ‘Charly. What on earth are you doing here?’
   ‘I need to talk to you.’
   ‘Well, I’m not short of time.’
   Uniformed officers were speaking in hushed tones in a corner of the lobby.‘Preferably in private.’
   ‘If you can hold on until the end of my shift.’ He gestured outside with his head. ‘There’s a little café down the road towards the train station. I’ll be with you in half an hour.’
   Back outside, the first thing Charly did was light a Juno. She had been prepared for anything but this. How was it possible for a chief inspector to be downgraded to porter? Half an hour later she had her answer, when Wilhelm Böhm appeared in the small, slightly overheated cafe, now devoid of oversleeves, and dressed as she remembered him in coat and bowler hat, an imposing figure who instantly commanded respect.
   ‘Detective Brenner couldn’t bear my presence any longer,’ he explained as he took his place beside her, a mug of coffee before him. ‘Perhaps he felt uneasy giving orders to a chief inspector. Anyway, he arranged this business with the police academy. Clearly he knows someone there.’
   ‘But they can’t just make you porter! Does Gennat know? Does the police commissioner know?’
   ‘Certainly not, and I would be grateful if you could keep it that way.’ He stirred his coffee. ‘It’s a chance to prove myself, Daluege said, but in reality they’re phasing me out. Seems my face no longer fits.’
   ‘I don’t think it’s your face that’s the problem.’ Charly didn’t know what to say. ‘I’m so sorry, Sir. It’s all my fault.’
   Böhm furrowed his brow as she told him what was on her mind, her carelessness with Weinert, the whole sorry tale. To her surprise he wasn’t in the least angry.
   ‘Oh, Charly,’ he said. ‘I wasn’t transferred because of that ridiculous article.’ He shook his head. ‘No, Daluege won’t stand for Social Democrats at headquarters.’
   ‘You’re a Social Democrat?’ Charly had always assumed that Böhm was above party politics, like Gennat. A democrat to the core, of course, but at the same time non-partisan.
   ‘Come off it! My only membership is with the Lankwitz Allotment Association. Someone from Alex saw me in the Pharus Halls, at an SPD rally. It would seem that’s enough these days to be classed as politically unreliable.’
   ‘Pardon me?’
   ‘Someone saw me there and informed the police commissioner, or went straight to Daluege. No doubt they were waiting for an opportunity. It’s no secret I have a low opinion of the Nazis.’
   ‘That was never an issue in the past.’
   ‘What can you do?’ Böhm attempted a smile. ‘How’s that fiancé of yours? Made any progress on our case?’
   ‘Yes and no. He was seconded to the Politicals. Probably interrogating Communists as we speak.’
   ‘I saw this coming, you know. Soon 1A will have the whole of Homicide working for them. It’s almost a relief to have been transferred out.’ He shook his head. ‘Just when we were starting to get a few leads.’
   ‘A witness got in touch, Wosniak’s former lieutenant from the war. He thinks he knows who the killer is.’
   Charly told Böhm the story, and when she had finished he shook his head. ‘What a lot of cock and bull.’
   ‘That’s what Gereon thinks too.’
   ‘Which doesn’t change the fact that Wosniak is dead. Still, what’s one more death these days?’
   ‘Gereon’s secretary is collating everything that comes in.’
   ‘What about the request we submitted to the Reichswehr?’
   ‘Gereon hasn’t mentioned it. He goes through the material with her each night.’
   In fact Gereon was mainly picking up the dog when he called in on Erika Voss, but Böhm didn’t have to know that.
   ‘Do me one last favour, Charly,’ he seized her arm and looked at her beseechingly. ‘Don’t tell anyone about what you’ve seen here. No one, do you understand? I don’t want the bastard who denounced me to have the satisfaction.’
   40
   Entering the green inner courtyard of St. Hedwig’s Hospital, straight away Rath felt the bustle of the city recede. The complex was bigger than it looked from the outside but that wasn’t why he had chosen it, nor was it the building’s proximity to Alex. No, he had chosen it because it was a Catholic hospital. They wouldn’t cooperate withthe SA at St Hedwig’s. Even former Chancellor Brüning had found asylum here after being sacked by Hindenburg.
   Not that CID were in the staff’s good books either. The doctor in attendance, who introduced himself as Dr Fabritius, looked at Rath with unmistakable reproach. ‘What happened to this man, Inspector?’
   ‘An accident, the SA tell me.’
   ‘An accident? The man has lost his right eye, the entire eyeball. Let’s leave aside the bruises and cuts, and the two broken ribs.’
   Rath looked around before responding.‘The SA is no boys’ choir, Doctor, which is why I requested that the man be transferred here, from Papestrasse.’ He looked around a second time to make sure they really were alone. ‘If I have my way, the SA won’t be getting him back. Will you help me?’ Dr Fabritius nodded. ‘I need thepatient as a witness in a murder investigation. Is he fit for questioning?’
   ‘There’s no reason you shouldn’t try. He’s certainly responsive. A tough customer evidently. Do you want company?’
   ‘Not necessary. It’s better if I speak to Juretzka out of the public e…’ Rath corrected himself. ‘Alone.’
   An aggressive-looking SA man stood guard outside Juretzka’s room. An auxiliary police officer. ‘You can’t go in there,’ he said, as Rath approached.
   ‘On the contrary. CID had Herr Juretzka transferred here. After a bad… accident in Papestrasse.’
   ‘What are you trying to say?’
   ‘That the poor man had an accident. That’s correct, isn’t it?’ The SA man looked suspicious. ‘I’m going to question him now. See that I am not disturbed. That goes for your superiors too.’ The SA man gazed stupidly. ‘Do I make myself clear?’
   ‘Yes, Sir.’ The man stood to attention.
   Leo Juretzka was alone in his room. It wasn’t just his eye that was bandaged, but his left ear too; there were various sticking plasters attached to his face. He wore a patient gown and looked as if he had been washed. The expression in his remaining eye was still strangely blank.
   ‘Good day, Herr Juretzka,’ Rath said, approaching the bed. ‘Please don’t say anything until you’ve heard me out.’
   Juretzka nodded.
   Rath pulled up a chair, and positioned himself so that he could whisper into Juretzka’s un-bandaged ear. ‘I’m from CID. Johann Marlow knows you have been transferred here, but won’t be able to secure your release with the help of his lawyer alone. I had to tell a white lie to get you out of SA prison. If we don’t want to get busted, you’ll have to help corroborate it. I’ve informed the SA that you are a witness in a murder investigation.’
   For a moment Juretzka’s left eye seemed to grow larger.
   ‘I’m going to have you brought into police headquarters for questioning. Here’s what you’re going to say. Make sure you memorise the details.’
   As Juretzka listened, life slowly returned to his face. Rath wouldn’t get another chance to speak to him alone like this. At Alex there would a stenographer, perhaps even a colleague present, and his ‘witness’ needed to be in shape.
   ‘Got it?’ he asked. ‘Nollendorfplatz, you remember?’
   ‘Yes.’ Juretzka’s voice was scratchy. He seemed not to have spoken in a long time.
   ‘Good. Then that’s what you say tomorrow at headquarters.’
   ‘And then?’
   ‘Then you’re done being an SA prisoner. We’ll let you go, and the boys in Papestrasse won’t notice a thing. Make sure you hole up somewhere no one knows you and where the SA can’t find you. It…’
   They were interrupted by shouting in the corridor. Rath looked out. The SA officer was remonstrating angrily with a gaunt, well-dressed man, Marlow’s lawyer, Dr Kohn. Rath had seen him on one previous occasion, during a memorable appearance in court. One of the finest exponents of his craft, even he was powerless against the SA.
   ‘Prisoner Juretzka is in protective custody. He cannot be released.’
   ‘Then show me the arrest warrant!’ Kohn appeared to be sizing the man up for a duel.
   ‘According to a decree issued by the Reich President on 28th February article one hundred and fourteen is no longer valid…’
   ‘Stop!’ The lawyer waved dismissively. ‘I’ve heard it all before.’ His belligerence returned. ‘But you must grant me the opportunity to speak with my client.’
   ‘Out of the question,’ Rath interrupted.
   ‘I beg your pardon?’
   ‘CID,’ Rath showed his identification. ‘I’m satisfied that Prisoner Juretzka is currently unresponsive.’
   ‘Are you qualified to make such a pronouncement?’
   ‘Come and see Dr Fabritius yourself, if you don’t believe me, but leave Herr Juretzka in peace.’ The SA man broke into a grin. ‘If you wish to speak with your client, then be at police headquarters tomorrow at eleven. A Division. You can provide legal counsel there.’
   Kohn appeared to wrestle with himself before nodding his agreement.‘Where can I find this Dr Fabritius?’
   ‘I’ll take you to him.’
   Before Rath set off with Marlow’s lawyer he threw a glance at the SA man, who responded with a conspiratorial wink. Rath grinned back. It couldn’t hurt to have the SA think he was on their side.
   41
   He looked at his watch before starting across the bridge. He had arrived at the train station in good time, but was moving less freely than usual and didn’t want to be late. Another ten minutes would surely be enough. He could already see the bare treetops on the other side of the River Havel.
   Meifert had appeared relieved when he’d suggested the meeting point. No doubt the idea of receiving an acquaintance from his previous life, a comrade from the war, within his own four walls or even at school, was awkward. He had sounded uncertain on the telephone. The encounter with his past must have rattled him.
   Stone statues of soldiers lined the Kaiser-Wilhelm Bridge, with all the uniforms of Prussia’s glorious past represented save the most recent. Their presence was summoned, not in carved stone, but in the flesh and blood of an ex-serviceman who stood by the balustrade on crutches, gaze lowered and hand outstretched. How many veterans were forced to demean themselves and beg? Not every ex-soldier had such a cushy number as Linus Meifert.Minus, as he was known in those days, and did the mathematician’s students call him the same thing?
   Even the old city palace made a wretched impression. Once the seat of Prussia’s power and splendour, today it housed the employment exchange and a few offices of Potsdam Municipal Council. These were strange times.
   Minus sat reading a newspaper towards the rear of the deserted pleasure garden. A gravel path ran parallel to the railway line that separated the grounds from the river. Meifert had gained weight and his hair was thinner, but there was no mistaking it was him.
   Approaching his quarry, he tried to hide the pain that walking caused, but in the end it proved unnecessary. Meifert didn’t look up until he reached the bench. He put his paper to one side. ‘You?’ he said.
   ‘Who did you expect?’
   He knew very well who Minus had been expecting. He took another step closer to the bench, while his left hand felt for the soft, smooth handle. The soldier’s bride. His ‘bride’ was no rifle, but something far more elegant, and equally deadly.
   ‘I thought you were dead.’ Meifert folded his newspaper precisely.
   ‘Do I look dead?’
   ‘I haven’t said a thing, and nor will I, but I can’t vouch for Roddeck.’
   ‘You don’t have to.’ Before Meifert could say anything else, he grabbed his head in a choke hold and stabbed. Meifert gave a final gasp before his body went limp. The whole thing lasted less than three seconds. He looked around before removing the blade. Still no one.
   ‘Who’s dead now?’ He let the corpse slump. ‘I’m sorry, Minus, but there’s no other way. For what it’s worth… I hated you even then.’
   He resisted the impulse to spit on the corpse. Leave no trace, he thought, wiping down everything he had touched with a white handkerchief. He gazed on his work like a painter admiring his latest portrait. Minus sat on the park bench, looking as if he had nodded off while reading his paper. An idyllic image, when you ignored the blood that trickled from his left nostril and dripped red on the page.
   It had taken days for anyone to notice the dead tramp at Nollendorfplatz, but this was Potsdam, not Berlin. Things would move faster here.
   From the tower of the garrison church, the bells chimed the first notes ofÜb immer Treu und Redlichkeit, before the fast train rattled across the line from Magdeburg and drowned out all other sounds.
   42
   It had worked. Weinert had delivered a major story inDer Tag, dripping with all kinds of jingoistic hullabaloo. Wosniak, the faithful orderly, killed because his lieutenant was threatening to reveal the truth about an army captain who had murdered two innocent civilians and one of his own soldiers. At first Weinert had refused to mention that this captain was Jewish.‘What does that have to do with anything?’ he had asked.
   ‘It increases the chance of the case being reopened. My commissioner is a Nazi and a Jewish villain always plays well.’
   So, now the article read:
   Jewish Captain Engel, missing since March 1917, was previously thought killed in action. Now a witness present around the time of Heinrich Wosniak’s murder has emerged, who claims to have seen a man matching the dead captain’s description last month at Nollendorfplatz. Is someone out there determined to suppress the truth, if necessary by lethal force?
   Weinert must have acquired a galley proof ofMärzgefallene, or perhaps an advance copy, and he quoted freely from Roddeck’s miserable effort. Unfortunately it wasn’t justDer Tag that carried a story on the Wosniak case, but theKreuzzeitung too. Rath found the paper on his desk as he brought Kirie in to Erika Voss.
   ‘The police commissioner wants to see you,’ she said, gesturing to the page that lay open. ‘And I think I know why.’
   POLICE REFUSE TO PROVIDE ENDANGERED AUTHOR PROTECTION
   DEATH THREATS WON’T PREVENT WARTIME REVELATIONS FROM COMING TO LIGHT – STAY TUNED FOR MORE
   Esteemed readers of the Neue Preussische Zeitung,
   The eagerly awaited serialisation of the novel Märzgefallene, which charts Lieutenant Achim von Roddeck’s wartime experiences on the Western Front, will begin, as previously announced, in these pages this Monday 13th March. This is due, in no small part, to the great courage of the author, who, in the face of the gravest of threats, remains steadfast in his desire to reveal uncomfortable truths from the Great War.
   ‘I will not submit,’ Roddeck told the Neue Preussische Zeitung. ‘A Prussian officer will not be intimidated.’
   His brave stance is especially remarkable given the undeniable gravity of these threats, which have already claimed the life of Lieutenant von Roddeck’s faithful orderly, who led a harsh but proud existence as a disabled war veteran before dying a violent death some days ago at Nollendorfplatz.
   It is all the more inexplicable, therefore, that the Berlin Police should refuse our endangered author any form of personal protection. Particularly when the investigating officer, one Detective Inspector Gereon Rath, still has nothing to show for his efforts, despite the eye-opening testimony of Lieutenant von Roddeck, who has provided the aforementioned inspector with a forensic account of the background to these threats and the potentially lethal danger arising from them.
   The article went on, taking up almost half a page, but for Rath the byline sufficed. Martin Frank, you piece of shit, he thought.
   True, the piece might not have been as sensational as those usually carried inDer Tag orB.Z. am Mittag. Displaying all the hallmarks of theKreuzzeitung’s old-fashioned, militaristic posturing, its content was nevertheless highly defamatory. Even so, the scurrilous conjecture – garnished with the odd swipe at Jews in the officer corps – was by no means the worst thing about the article. No, the worst thing was the threefold appearance of the name Gereon Rath, on one occasion complete with police rank.
   No wonder the commissioner wanted to see him. When he reached the office, however, the wooden bench outside was already occupied.‘Good morning, Inspector,’ Ernst Gennat said. ‘Do you have any idea how much I hate climbing stairs? Usually I speak to the commissioner on the telephone.’
   ‘My apologies, Sir. I had no idea the case would create such waves.’
   ‘You’ve been talking to the press again, I see.’ Gennat held the offending paper in his hand.
   ‘It was Herr Frank who telephoned me. He didn’t say he was reporting on the case.’
   ‘You should have told me he called.’ Buddha produced a second newspaper from under theKreuzzeitung.Der Tag.‘What about this? You may not be mentioned by name, but this Weinert’s an acquaintance of yours, am I right?’
   ‘Yes, Sir. He also telephoned me. But only after I spoke with you the other day and…’
   ‘You might at least have told me about this mysterious new witness.’
   ‘After our conversation I didn’t hold out much hope of working the case again…’
   ‘So you fed your friend Weinert with information so that the commissioner would come under public pressure.’
   ‘To helpyou, Sir.’
   ‘Thank you, but in future keep me informed of new developments as they come in. This witness of yours. Is he reliable?’ Rath nodded. ‘And he confirms the suspicion that Wosniak was murdered by a veteran previously assumed dead?’
   ‘Looks that way.’
   ‘Not such a busybody after all, your Lieutenant Roddeck.’
   ‘Perhaps not.’ Rath was contrite. Best get some practice in. The police commissioner was bound to deal out more of the same.
   A wiry, scar-faced man emerged from the commissioner’s office. Rudolf Diels, the new head of Section 1A, from the Interior Ministry and appointed personally by Göring. What might he want here, to free up even more CID officers for the Politicals?
   Diels issued a brief, polite greeting to Gennat and disappeared. Rath watched him as he went. They were around the same age, and already Diels was head of the Political Police. Rath wondered if he’d ever make it past detective inspector.
   ‘Please proceed, gentlemen,’ Dagmar Kling said. Levetzow’s secretary had appeared behind Diels in the doorway. Gennat rose from the bench, breathing heavily. For a moment Rath was tempted to offer him an arm, but decided against it.
   Magnus von Levetzow looked stern behind his desk.‘So, gentlemen, there you are.’ Rath und Gennat sat on the uncomfortable chairs the commissioner kept for guests. Nothing had changed since the Zörgiebel years. ‘You know why you are here,’ Levetzow began.
   Rath left the talking to Gennat.‘I believe I have the reason here in my hand.’ Buddha lifted the newspapers.
   ‘How is it the press are better informed about developments in a murder inquiry than I am?’
   ‘Might I remind the commissioner that the case was shelved last week on the instructions of the Daluege Bureau.’
   ‘Since when did the Daluege Bureau adjudicate on such matters?’
   ‘It was they who transferred Chief Inspector Böhm out of Homicide, and decreed that Officers Gräf and Rath be seconded to the Political Police to help thwart a Communist conspiracy…’
   ‘Yes, yes, I know all that.’ Levetzow waved dismissively. ‘No one said we shouldshelve a murder inquiry, especially given such explosive developments.’
   ‘We haven’t, Sir.’ Rath interjected before Gennat could say anything, ignoring his superior’s angry glance. ‘With respect, I tasked my secretary with collating all fresh evidence, and liaising with me on a daily basis.’
   ‘Then why haven’t you beenliaising with me?’
   ‘Apologies, Sir,’ Gennat said, ‘but we didn’t want to bother you with details. Might I remind you that in the course of the last few days I have repeatedly requested that my men be reinstated.’
   ‘I have just spoken with Senior Government Councillor Diels. Starting from next week, we will be reassigning all CID officers currently seconded to the Political Police to their respective departments.’
   ‘Then Diels’s theory has been vindicated?’ Rath asked, and instantly regretted it.
   ‘Pardon me?’
   ‘Well,’ Rath stammered. ‘Word is that Diels doesn’t believe in the conspiracy theory being propagated by Göring. As far as he’s concerned, this van der Lubbe is a lone hand.’
   ‘Who told you this?’ Levetzow furrowed his brow.
   ‘I heard it somewhere. In the canteen most likely.’
   The commissioner gazed suspiciously at him.‘Gentlemen,’ he said at length. ‘The police cannot afford such press coverage. Especially now.’ Rath had expected nothing less. ‘Never again,’ Levetzow slapped the newspapers with the flat of his hand, ‘do I wish to read anything like this! We’re not dealing with the usual scandal sheets here.’
   On the contrary, Rath thought.Der Tag was a‘scandal sheet’ at best, but no doubt a Nazi gauged things differently. Certainly as far as anti-Semitism was concerned, the paper left little to be desired.
   ‘I don’t think I need tell you what must be done,’ Levetzow concluded his lecture. ‘Inspector Rath is to be released from Political Police duty with immediate effect, to devote himself to the Wosniak investigation. I will see to the personal safety of Lieutenant von Roddeck myself.’
   ‘Thank you, Sir,’ Rath said zealously. Gennat remained silent.
   ‘I don’t expect thanks,’ Levetzow said. ‘I expect results.’
   ‘Then you can rest assured, Sir. Progress will be swift. With our new witness…’
   ‘I’m not interested in theprogress of your investigation,’ Magnus von Levetzow thundered. ‘All I want is for you to track down this mass-murdering Jew!’
   43
   The squirt was becoming a real pain. He clung to her like a limpet. Eleven years old, and already on the streets. There were things he’d experienced in care that he wouldn’t talk about. ‘I’d rather die than go back,’ he had said, and, in the end, it was this sentence that bound them. Hannah recognised her own despair.
   There were times when it felt good not to have to wander the streets alone. Occasionally Fritze had won a smile from her, pilfering an apple, or wheedling a mark out of someone in a fur-coat, but in the evenings she realised just how attached he was to her.
   Still too innocent to want anything indecent, Hannah thought of him more as a kind of kid brother, but all too often felt like… ‘Fritze, I am not your mother!’
   How many times had she said it now, and seen how the statement stung him? He no longer had a mother either… but was that a reason to follow her around like a dog?
   Whatever her feelings she knew she had to get rid of him. She was the one on the run. It was just a line for him, that he’d rather die than return to care, but for Hannah it was true. Shewould die if she was ever picked up. Prison, care, or Dalldorf, Huckebein was sure to find her.
   Since their night in the trunk, they hadn’t been apart for a second, and she wondered whether the Märchenbrunnen posse would take her seriously with him in tow. For all that, he was resourceful, and not just when it came to breakfast; he knew the best places to sleep too. Hannah hadn’t had to spend another night in a damp sandpit since Fritze came on the scene, and as for scrounging money there was no one better.
   Today at Bahnhof Zoo he was working his little boy charm on rich-looking passers-by, of which there were any number. Hannah didn’t know what he was serving up – her role was to collect the takings – but whatever it was, it did the job. Almost everyone he spoke to parted with a few coins, and no one thought to call the police. There was no shortage of uniformed cops around either.
   She didn’t look like a beggar in her new clothes, and certainly not a fugitive from Dalldorf. She didn’t know if the cops had photos to help with their search. They had taken a few after the fire, but she didn’t look like that anymore. Her gaze had been so empty, back when she thought her life was over. It wasn’t until Huckebein tried to kill her that she had been overtaken by an almost demonic will to live.
   Yes, she wanted to live, she knew that now, even if she wasn’t sure what she wanted from life. First just survive; don’t get caught. The police, flanked by the odd brownshirt and German Shepherd, didn’t seem to be looking for her, but she stood behind a pillar anyway.
   Concentrating hard on them, at first she didn’t notice the man limping down the platform steps. This time he wasn’t dressed in the uniform of an asylum warder, but a fancy coat and equally ill-fitting bowler hat. Berlin wasn’t quite as big as she thought. She made no sudden movements, but Huckebein was heading straight for her and already looking her way. Had he recognised her? She couldn’t be certain. She’d never worn such new clothes in her life, not in the asylum, and certainly not in the Crow’s Nest, and her hair was covered by a red beret.
   But hehad recognised her, she could tell by his eyes, and his slow, deliberate movements like a tiger trying not to alert its prey. Why here? Whynow? She hurried away.
   Bursting out of the train station, she rushed down the the steps to the underground, turning to confirm that he was behind her – but with his leg he couldn’t move quickly. Hannah laughed. She realised she was faster; he had no chance on the steps.
   ‘Stop that girl! She’s a fugitive from the asylum!’ he shouted.
   She tried to look as normal as possible so that no one could think he meant her. Briskly, but without running, she climbed the steps to the other side of Hardenbergstrasse, in the shadow of the railway overpass.Stop that mad girl came the cry from below. He didn’t have to be the one to catch her. It was enough to have her sent back to Dalldorf. Once she was there, he could kill her in his own time; finish what he had begun.
   She pretended indifference. As long as he didn’t appear up here and start pointing his finger, she’d be fine. Berliners weren’t famous for interfering in other people’s business.
   Seeing the tram chug slowly down Joachimsthaler Strasse, she took a running jump and… a young man grabbed her hand and helped her up.
   ‘You do know you’re not allowed,’ he said sternly, before smiling and throwing her a wink.
   Hannah returned his smile and thanked him, pushing towards the rear of the car behind a heavy-set matron. Gazing through a gap in the passengers she spied Huckebein limping up the underground steps and looking around. He threw his hat furiously onto the ground.Too bad, my friend, she thought,looks like I’ve escaped for a second time. The conductor came and she placed a ten pfennig piece in his hand. Luckily Fritze had already given her some of his takings. There would be no trouble on the tram.
   She stayed on for a few stops, eventually alighting on Kaiserallee, far away from Bahnhof Zoo. Standing in the shadow of a newspaper kiosk she broke into such hysterical laughter that she wondered if Dalldorf hadn’t made her crazy after all.
   44
   Juretzka appeared in the Castle at eleven on the dot, escorted by two SA officers and Marlow’s lawyer, Dr Kohn. Kohn was granted entry to the interrogation room; the SA agreed to remain outside.
   When everyone was sitting down, including stenographer Christel Temme, Rath took his place behind the desk. Juretzka wore a black eye patch over the gauze bandage covering his empty socket, which lent him a swashbuckling appearance. He still looked the worse for wear, albeit not as listless as in hospital yesterday. He sounded better too, rattling off his statement while Temme diligently noted everything.
   Rath leaned back contentedly. Everything was going according to plan. The commissioner had freed a few extra men and Rath had settled on Henning and Czerwinski, nicknamed Plisch and Plum. The pair were unlikely to exceed their brief, or ask too many difficult questions. He had deliberately avoided requesting Gräf, and not just because of his erstwhile colleague’s familiarity with the case.
   Plisch and Plum had already been dispatched to Potsdam, after Erika Voss had discovered that one of Wosniak and Roddeck’s former comrades lived there. The unit’s other surviving members were further west, in Magdeburg and Elberfeld. Corporal Meifert, now a senior teacher, was the only one on their list who lived within visiting distance of Alex.
   Rath planned to call on the others next week, along with Engel’s widow in Bonn. They had little more to go on than Engel’s name and the results of his medical examination. That and the photo the Reichswehr had enclosed from its archives. Gazing proudly into the lens with his curled moustache, Engel didn’t look any more spiteful than your average Prussian officer. Rath recognised the look from the portrait of his brother, taken shortly before Anno was killed in action. He placed Engel’s photograph on the table in front of Juretzka, who nodded his recognition as agreed.
   ‘Yes, that’s the man I saw at Nollendorfplatz.’
   It sounded almost a little too mechanical, but Christel Temme studiously took it down. Rath had requested her for a reason; there was every chance Erika Voss would see through the swindle.
   ‘If you could make out a fair copy…’ he said, when she had committed everything to paper.
   He waited until she closed the door behind her and he was alone with Kohn and Juretzka.‘This business with your eye,’ he asked. ‘How did it happen?’
   ‘That’s none of your concern,’ Juretzka said. ‘Just see that I get out of here.’
   Rath nodded.
   ‘So what happens now?’ Kohn asked. ‘The SA are waiting for my client outside. They don’t care that I have a prisoner release order.’
   ‘Don’t worry about the SA.’ Rath spoke quietly, not knowing if they could hear behind the door. ‘Come to my office at three o’clock this afternoon.’
   ‘And how…’
   ‘Just trust me. Be there at three and you can walk out of here with Herr Juretzka, but right now I need you to leave. Make a little scene as you go.’
   ‘By all means, Inspector.’ Kohn put on his hat, and took a few frantic breaths until his face turned red.
   ‘This is an outrage,’ he shouted, flinging the door open. ‘Anoutrage!’ He turned in the doorway. ‘My client is not a common criminal!’
   Rath calmly followed.‘Your clientis a common criminal,’ he said.
   ‘There will be consequences, Inspector, that much I can guarantee!’
   ‘Do whatever you see fit, but Prisoner Juretzka’s place is here in custody. And there’s nothing a Jew shyster like you can do about it.’
   ‘You mean to insult me now?’
   ‘Please. It must still be possible to call a Jew a Jew.’
   Kohn let his gaze flit to the SA officers and back. He waved dismissively, turned on his heels and stormed down the corridor, coat billowing behind him.
   The SA men gazed after him in amusement.‘Let’s have the prisoner then,’ said the higher-ranking of the two, a Scharführer.
   ‘Pardon me?’
   ‘We have to get him back to Papestrasse. You’ve finished interrogating him, haven’t you? And he’s seen a doctor. Time to take the gloves off.’
   ‘Prisoner Juretzka is staying here.’
   ‘We have strict instructions to return him once the interrogation is complete. He’s a career criminal.’
   ‘Once the interrogation iscomplete. It will be continuing after lunch.’ He winked at the Scharführer. ‘Without a lawyer.’
   The SA man nodded and grinned.
   ‘For the time being Juretzka will remain in police custody. I should be through with him by tonight. You can come and fetch him then.’
   The SA officers looked uncertainly at each other.‘Very well,’ the Scharführer said at length, ‘but you could have spared us the waiting around.’
   Right on cue the custody officer emerged, whom Rath had requested by telephone.‘I’m here for a Prisoner Juretzka,’ he said.
   The SA officers took their leave with a Hitler salute and the custody officer placed Juretzka in handcuffs.‘I hope I can rely on you to return the prisoner at three o’clock,’ Rath said, ‘and that he’ll be fit for questioning.’
   ‘Have no fear, chief. You’re not dealing with the SA here.’ He turned to Juretzka. ‘You have bread and pea soup to look forward to.’
   45
   The canteen was as chaotic as ever. Rath looked for an out-of-the-way table to read Roddeck’s novel in peace. The story of the murdering army captain was now their official line of investigation. If the police commissioner needed a Jewish villain in order to approve Gereon Rath’s return to Homicide, then he could have one.
   Achim von Roddeck had excoriated Benjamin Engel in print, depicting him as a cold-blooded sadist who took pleasure in death, only to die in an explosion himself. Or not, if the lieutenant’s hunch was correct.
   ‘Afternoon, Gereon. Can I join you?’ Reinhold Gräf stood tray in hand.
   ‘Reinhold! Sit down!’
   Gräf unfolded his napkin and began on his soup. Pea soup. Rath wondered if it was the same as the batch served in custody. It wasn’t for nothing that he’d plumped for pork with sauerkraut and mash.
   ‘Still working for the Politicals?’ he asked when the silence threatened to become embarrassing.
   Gräf nodded and gestured towards the manuscript. ‘I see you’ve got your old case back?’
   ‘Orders of the police commissioner. After the Wosniak investigation wound up in the papers again.’
   ‘Through no fault of your own, of course…’ Gräf grinned over his spoon. There was something in his tone that Rath couldn’t abide.
   ‘You think I enjoy being summoned by the commissioner?’ he barked, regretting it instantly. Goddamn it, he thought, the man’s done nothing to you. Once upon a time you thought of him as a friend. Until you realised he’d been lying all these years…
   ‘Sorry, I didn’t mean anything. So, there’s something in this lieutenant’s story after all?’
   ‘Looks that way.’
   With that, conversation stalled again and, for a time, there was nothing to be heard save the tinkling of cutlery and murmur of voices from other tables. Gräf placed his spoon to one side.
   ‘About what happened recently. I have the feeling you might have got the wrong end of the stick.’
   Rath was surprised Gräf could broach the subject so directly. ‘What do you mean?’
   ‘It’s just, I have the feeling you’ve been avoiding me lately.’
   ‘I have a lot on my plate. I’m getting married soon.’
   ‘Fare thee well bachelor days…’
   ‘If you say so.’
   ‘Why don’t we have a drink in the Dreieck to mark your final days of freedom?’
   ‘Let’s.’
   Rath was glad when Gräf had cleaned his plate and said his goodbyes. He lit a cigarette and pretended to immerse himself in Roddeck’s manuscript, but couldn’t concentrate any longer. Soon his thoughts turned elsewhere.
   Returning from lunch the interview transcript lay on his desk, ready-typed by Christel Temme, quick and reliable as ever. He picked it up, left a note for Erika Voss and went on his way. Gustav Kohn was waiting outside the interrogation room when he arrived. There wasn’t an auxiliary officer in sight as Leo Juretzka was escorted in at three on the dot by the same guard as before.
   ‘Shall we, then?’ Rath said and opened the door.
   ‘Should I wait?’ the guard asked.
   ‘No need, but you can take off his cuffs.’
   The guard did as bidden, and pressed the cuffs into Rath’s hand. ‘Your choice,’ he said and went to the door. ‘Shout if you need me.’
   Rath waited until he was gone, then unfolded the interview transcript.
   ‘I’ll read what you need to sign before leaving,’ he said, and began. ‘“On the afternoon of February 20th 1933, I was passing under the elevated railway line at Nollendorfplatz when I saw a man leaning over a homeless person, who then proceeded to walk in my direction. Since he was comingtowards me, I got a good look at his face; it was the same man whose image Detective Inspector Gereon Rath later showed me.”’
   ‘Rolls off the tongue,’ Juretzka interrupted. ‘What are you going to do with it?’
   ‘It’ll go into the case file. It’s my justification for prising you away from the SA.’
   ‘You already have. So I don’t need to put my Friedrich Wilhelm on it, am I right?’
   ‘Your what?’
   ‘My client prefers not to provide his signature,’ Kohn said. ‘He retracts his statement.’
   ‘That will make it harder for me to justify Herr Juretzka’s release from SA prison.’
   ‘You’ll think of something. My client’s incarceration had little to do with the rule of law, so I wouldn’t go overboard on anylegal justification.’ Kohn gestured towards Juretzka, who seemed more and more like a swashbuckling pirate the nearer he came to release. ‘Herr Marlow doesn’t want the name Juretzka appearing in any police statements.’
   ‘Then tell Marlow that I’m risking my career here. Juretzka only got out of SA prison as a result ofthis statement – and now you’re saying he won’t sign?’
   ‘Marlow tells me you’re the resourceful type, Inspector. You’ll think of a solution. Why don’t you just tell your superiors what happened: that Leo Juretzka and his Jew shyster played you for a fool.’
   ‘Thanks for the tip.’
   ‘Yours for free, and I should tell you, my services usually come at a price.’
   Kohn stood up. Juretzka followed.
   ‘That thing there,’ Rath said, pointing towards Juretzka’s eye patch, ‘will make your client stick out like a sore thumb. Be careful that the SA don’t fetch him back. Ringverein members are about as popular as Communists.’
   ‘Once we pass through these doors, you won’t be seeing my client for a very long time. Everything’s prepared, there’s no need for you to worry… and yes,’ Kohn said, reaching inside his briefcase. ‘Here. So that you have something in writing.’
   He placed the document on the table. A prisoner release order.
   Dr Gustav Kohn left the room with his client, a career criminal wanted by the SA, and Rath sat at the table, playing with the handcuffs the guard had left him. When the telephone rang he gave a start. It was Erika Voss.‘Please excuse the interruption, Sir, but it’s urgent.’
   ‘You’re not interrupting. What is it?’
   ‘Detective Czerwinski is on the line. If you wait a moment, I’ll patch him through.’
   ‘What is it?’ Rath asked, when he could hear Czerwinski wheezing.
   ‘Boss?’
   ‘Speaking.’
   ‘We’re here at this teacher’s house.’
   Rath looked at the watch Charly had given him.‘You’re only there now?’
   ‘He wasn’t home, so we waited.’
   ‘And?’
   ‘Alfons spoke to a neighbour who was coming up the stairs with her shopping. Gereon, I think you’d better get out here.’ Czerwinski paused awkwardly. ‘The woman says Linus Meifert was found yesterday in the park. He’s dead.’
   46
   Rath dropped Charly and Kirie at home before heading out on the AVUS to Potsdam, where Police Headquarters was a tiny, two-storey building that looked as if it went back to the days of Old Fritz. It was in Priesterstrasse, in the immediate vicinity of an enormous barracks at least twenty times its size. In Potsdam the military had always called the tune, even now when Germany was barely allowed any soldiers. At least, in contrast to Alex, there was plenty of parking outside.
   Henning and Czerwinski were waiting under the two old-fashioned streetlamps outside the entrance. Recognising the sand-coloured Buick they threw away their cigarettes.
   ‘So?’ Rath asked.
   ‘Meifert was found dead in the park over by the palace.’ Czerwinski pointed towards the end of the street. ‘The pleasure garden. A stone’s throw from here.’
   ‘How did he die?’
   ‘It’s better you ask Inspector Lehmann. He’s… how shall I put this? Not especially approachable.’
   ‘He’s the lead investigator?’
   ‘Very much so. He insisted on seeing our commanding officer. Seems to be beneath his dignity to speak with a humble detective.’
   Detective Inspector Lehmann was a textbook example of a Prussian official. Discreet and dressed in a grey suit, his sense of duty was bursting from his ears. He listened as Rath made his report.‘And you think the cases go together?’
   ‘A witness in my investigation has died on your patch.’
   ‘This isn’t mypatch, this is mycity. We’re not part of Berlin yet.’
   Rath ignored the Potsdam sensitivity.‘Was it a violent death?’
   ‘I should say so. Someone thrust a sharp object up his nose. A stiletto or something like it.’
   Just as Rath had feared. Evidently there was some truth in Achim von Roddeck’s arcane tale. ‘Then I can more or less guarantee the dead man is part of my case. Let’s get him transferred to Pathology in Berlin.’
   ‘That won’t be necessary. The corpse has already been examined.’
   ‘Perhaps so, but I think we’d be better off in Hannoversche Strasse. The pathologist there, Dr Schwartz, has already examined the first corpse and will be able to draw comparisons.’
   ‘I’m more than happy to have the corpse transferred, provided you supply the appropriate authorisation from your police commissioner. That doesn’t mean I’m relinquishing the case.’
   ‘Your case, my case, they’re one and the same. Berlin Homicide have been investigating this for two weeks! Maybe if you had reported to Main Branch you’d be better informed.’
   ‘I haven’t breached any regulations.’
   ‘Maybe not, but youhave shown an unwillingness to cooperate.’ Rath took care not to fly off the handle. ‘Isn’t it customary to look beyond the boundaries of your own precinct when confronted with a death like this and… I don’t know, search for parallels withother investigations?’
   ‘I’ll tell you what isn’t customary. Putting the blame on your colleagues. I can’t recall hearing anything about an unusual mode of death fromBerlin. As I understand it, Inspector, your man was killed first.’
   ‘We had other things to deal with, like the threat of a Communist uprising. Besides, the story was in all the papers.’
   ‘Our case was in the papers too. Only you lot aren’t interested in what happens inPotsdam.’
   The man was stubborn.‘I’ll supply the necessary documentation,’ Rath said. ‘So that our offices can work together. In the meantime could I take a look at the corpse?’
   Lehmann considered for a moment.‘Fine. Come with me.’
   The earthly remains of Linus Meifert were housed in a cooling cellar belonging to Potsdam Municipal Hospital, by the Berliner Tor. On the authority of Inspector Lehmann, who was well known here, they bypassed various doormen. A man in a white coat, approximately Rath’s age, joined them unbidden.
   ‘Dr Ehrmanntraut,’ Lehmann said. ‘He opened up the corpse at the behest of the public prosecutor.’
   Rath shook the doctor’s hand. ‘We’re here because of a similar case in Berlin.’
   ‘Is that right?’
   ‘We suspect it could be the same killer. The deceased served together during the war.’
   ‘Is that right?’ seemed to be one of Ehrmanntraut’s favourite phrases. He opened a door leading to a cold storage room containing five biers. Cardboard signs dangled from the toes of the covered corpses. The doctor put on his glasses, checked the signs carefully and finally lifted the sheet from the penultimate bier. ‘This is him.’
   Linus Meifert’s corpse was significantly less gruesome than that of his disfigured ex-comrade Wosniak, and better nourished. The dead man’s left nostril was one giant scab. ‘Can you tell me about the cross-section of the stab wound?’
   ‘Come again?’
   ‘Is the puncture channel unusual in any way?’
   ‘A long, sharp object, as I’ve already told Inspector Lehmann. You can refer to my report.’
   ‘I’m only asking becauseour cross-section was rather atypical.’
   ‘Who examined the corpse?’
   ‘Dr Schwartz.’
   ‘Is he still doing the rounds?’ Clearly Ehrmanntraut was no fan of the long-serving Berlin pathologist. Perhaps he had studied under Schwartz, and that, Rath guessed, would be no picnic. ‘We measured the length of the puncture wound,’ the doctor explained. ‘The shape of the cross-section didn’t seem relevant.’
   ‘Then please take another look,’ Rath said. ‘I’d stake my month’s salary on it being triangular.’
   47
   It was obvious now that Lieutenant Achim von Roddeck didn’t have a persecution complex, his fears were well-founded. Someone out there was assassinating members of his old troop. Two men who appeared in his war novel were now dead.
   Whether this someone was Captain Benjamin Engel, missing, presumed dead, was a different matter. Previously Rath hadn’t thought so: Juretzka’s statement had been a means of activating the police commissioner’s anti-Semitic reflex so that he might reopen the Wosniak case. So far, so good – only now, it looked as if the whole thing might be real after all.
   The corpse in Potsdam had made headlines in Berlin by Saturday morning. The police hadn’t informed the press, but they had informed Roddeck, and the news found its way into theKreuzzeitung, which could continue beating the drum for its soon-to-be-published serial. A novel, for the sake of which people were being killed… naturally, readers were curious.Nibelungen had brought publication, initially scheduled for May, forward by four weeks and everyone sensed a big payday. Apparently even the lieutenant’s personal protection was being exploited: theKreuzzeitung had published a picture of von Roddeck jutting his chin forward in the company of two scowling uniformed cops. The midday editions had followed suit, and though they failed to mention the novel’s forthcoming serialisation in theKreuzzeitung, their copy brimmed with anti-Semitic undertones.
   ‘I don’t like the way this is going,’ said Dr Schwartz, on whose desk Meifert’s corpse – after a call from the Prussian Interior Ministry – had landed after all. ‘A mysterious Jew, wandering like Ahasver and butchering brave German veterans. It sounds like something fromDer Stürmer.’
   Rath shrugged as if he felt the need to apologise personally.‘I don’t like it either, but the Jewish angle is what convinced the police commissioner to reopen the case.’
   ‘Anti-Semite as he is, I’m not surprised.’
   Rath had never heard the long-standing pathologist be so disrespectful about a serving commissioner. For all the scorn he might reserve for weak-stomached CID officers, Dr Schwartz had always been loyal to the Berlin Police. That seemed to have changed.
   Rath cleared his throat.‘But you can confirm it’s the same modus operandi?’
   ‘The same puncture channel, almost the exact same spot. As if the perpetrator had done it many times, practised it even.’
   ‘A soldier then?’
   ‘Do you want his rank and religion?’
   ‘All right. I was only asking.’
   ‘What do you want to hear? That only a Jewish captain can kill in such a perfidious manner?’
   ‘I’m no anti-Semite, I’m just looking for a Jewish captain.’
   ‘You’re right, I’m sorry.’ Dr Schwartz sounded calmer again. ‘It’s just… in times like these… it can be hard to know what to think of people.’ He covered the corpse and looked at Rath. ‘Do you know what Dr Karthaus said to me yesterday? He told me to take early retirement!’
   Gero Karthaus was Schwartz’s younger colleague. A little on the strange side, perhaps, but wiry and ambitious. Above all: not Jewish.
   ‘I’d be old enough, he said. In times like these, it would be better for all concerned. From one colleague to another, you understand.’ Schwartz shook his head. ‘Karthaus isn’t even a Nazi. It just suits him to swim with the tide.’
   Rath wasn’t so sure about that. These days more and more Nazis chose to hide in plain sight.
   48
   On Sunday afternoon, having cast his vote in the local elections with Charly at his side, Rath sped across the North German Plain on the Fernverkehrstrasse 1. The journey would take approximately ten hours, with a couple of breaks thrown in. He’d sooner have sent Henning and Czerwinski, but Gennat insisted that he make the trip to the Rhineland himself. No doubt Buddha was still smarting at Magnus Levetzow calling him to report.
   Charly wasn’t exactly thrilled, but there wasn’t a great deal she could say. Official assignments were sacred to her, especially when the order came from Gennat.
   His first port of call was Magdeburg, where, according to Erika Voss’s research, Private Hermann Wibeau now lived. Eventually he found the right street, but no one answered the door. He kept ringing, and finally the front door opposite opened and a woman with small, crafty eyes peered through the crack.
   ‘Are you looking for Herr Wiebau?’
   Rath looked at his note.‘HermannWibeau. He lives here, doesn’t he?’
   ‘Herr Wiebau is a travelling salesman. He’s rarely at home.’
   She made a point of mispronouncing the Huguenot name. Rath displayed equal force of will.‘What does Herr Wibeau sell?’
   The lady blushed.‘How should I know?’
   ‘You’re his neighbour, aren’t you?’
   ‘So?’
   ‘What time does Herr Wibeau usually get home?’
   ‘Hard to say. The police were here yesterday, too. Has something happened?’
   ‘I sent them,’ Rath said, showing his identification. ‘CID, Berlin. Herr Wibeau is an important witness.’
   He wrote a note on his card, and pushed it through Wibeau’s letterbox.
   What a start. The same story in Elberfeld and Bonn would mean two or three days’ work, and any amount of petrol, for damn all.
   He left Magdeburg and continued westwards, always in the direction of the sun. Passing through villages and towns, he was struck by the numbers of swastika flags hanging from windows, sometimes flying outside official buildings. It was polling day, of course, and the Germans loved nailing their colours to the mast, but in the course of the whole journey he didn’t see a single black-red-and-gold flag, let alone a red one. Voting wasn’t even over, and already it looked as if the Nazis had assumed control of Prussia’s town halls. Country dwellers had long since accepted the new powers, while Berlin and other cities resisted still.
   Somewhere beyond Hildesheim, he stopped for the second time, parking outside one of the few country inns that hadn’t been converted into a polling station. The front was draped in black-white-and-red, but at least there was no swastika. It was still cold, though with the sun shining all day it felt as if spring were in the air. Rath ordered a cup of coffee, lit a cigarette and fetched Roddeck’s manuscript from his pocket.
   We spied an enormous pillar of smoke on the western horizon, illuminated by the rising sun, and then, after some delay, heard the thundering explosion. The effect was as a tempest, where the rumble lags behind the flash, allowing the experienced meteorologist to determine the distance of the storm. At first we believed the British artillery had started firing, especially since more blasts followed, though none was as violent as the first. It, moreover, had not been preceded by the typical whistling of grenades that warns of an impending artillery strike. All this was only apparent in retrospect, however. A short time later the captain’s car roared towards us as we effected our retreat. Thelen, the captain’s driver, climbed out, then Grimberg, the demolition expert, uniforms and faces covered in dust. Immediately they submitted their report and we learned what had happened. Making an inspection of the booby-traps on the front line, Captain Engel had fallen victim to a misfire triggered as he set foot inside a trench. Thelen and Grimberg were fortunate to be standing by the car when the charge detonated. They had searched for the captain but soon acknowledged the futility of their efforts. Everything had collapsed, theyreported, Engel was fully submerged in the rubble of the dugout. Though Thelen had fetched a shovel from the vehicle in order to clear the point where he believed his captain lay, by then the British had opened fire and they had no choice but to abort.
   My men and I looked at one another and I could see from their faces that they, like I, felt a silent satisfaction. After the events of yesterday, the blackmailing captain’s death seemed like a higher form of justice.
   No one was upset, not even Engel’s driver, when I ordered that we move without delay. Going back would only have compromised Operation Alberich. ‘There’s nothing more we can do,’ I said, and my men nodded in silence. And so we left the dead captain where he lay, in the grave that war had dug him.
   Roddeck must have thought Engel was dead when he wrote these lines. Now the fallen captain had murdered two men. Rath paid and went on his way. Shortly before dusk he reached Elberfeld.
   Friedrich Grimberg, Roddeck’s former demolition expert, lived on Tannenbergstrasse, on the shores of the Wupper, the suspension monorail rumbling along at eye level outside the windows of his second floor flat. Its passengers could see into his rooms, and most were glad of the distraction.
   ‘Doesn’t it bother you?’ Rath asked in Grimberg’s living room. Pans clattered in the kitchen. It was supper time.
   ‘You get used to it. I’ve nothing to hide. If it becomes a nuisance, I just pull the curtains.’
   ‘I understand my colleagues from Elberfeld have spoken with you already?’
   ‘One was here last night to check I was still alive. What’s all this about? My wife was beside herself.’ Rath outlined Roddeck’s tale in a few words. ‘Achim von Roddeck has joined the literary fraternity?’
   ‘Looks like it.’
   ‘You have to earn your crust.’ Grimberg shrugged. ‘I have remained within my trade, though I now work as a quarry blaster.’
   ‘Tell me about what happened back then. The murder of the two civilians and the recruit.’
   ‘I wasn’t there.’
   ‘Ah…’
   ‘I stayed on in the village to lay the traps. Everything had to be ready for our withdrawal the next day.’
   The traps. The way Grimberg spoke about them you’d think they were jumping jacks, but they had claimed the lives of countless British and French soldiers.
   ‘It was one of your traps that killed Captain Engel, am I right?’
   ‘What are you trying to say?’
   ‘It’s just a question.’
   ‘They were all mine. It’s why I was there on the morning of the retreat, when the captain carried out the inspection.’
   ‘And this one trap was faulty…’
   ‘Inspector, to this day I don’t know how it happened, but it certainly wasn’t faulty.’
   ‘Then why did it go off?’
   ‘I don’t know. Perhaps a pigeon strayed into the dugout and became caught in the wire. Fluttered around a bit, and then: boom!’
   ‘What wire?’
   ‘The fuse was to be activated by a wire in the final dugout. It wasn’t supposed to go off until as many enemies as possible had entered our abandoned trenches.’
   ‘Sounds brutal.’
   ‘War is brutal, Inspector. Those were our orders.’
   ‘What about requisitioning and hiding French gold? How did that square with your orders?’
   ‘It didn’t.’ Grimberg looked around, as if afraid his wife might hear. ‘I blame myself to this day.’
   ‘But you said yourself, you weren’t there when it was hidden.’
   ‘I knew about it, and said nothing.’ He shrugged. ‘Still, why should it matter now? The gold’s gone.’
   ‘What do you mean?’
   ‘Didn’t Roddeck tell you? That we were in France again, after the war was over?’
   ‘No.’ Rath didn’t mention that he’d failed to question Roddeck properly because he didn’t believe his story.
   ‘We crossed the border on different days, and at different checkpoints, to avoid suspicion. It isn’t so easy to get into France. You need a visa, and have to say exactly where you are going and why. Each of us had a different story for the French authorities, and it wasn’t until Cambrai that we met. Roddeck was even more cautious. He only sent his shadow.’
   ‘Who?’
   ‘Wosniak, his orderly. He could trust him. Wosniak worshipped Roddeck like a saint.’
   ‘Yet in recent years the good lieutenant rather neglected his faithful Henrich.’
   ‘He had enough problems keeping himself above water, our Herr Gigolo.’
   ‘Roddeck’s a dance host?’
   ‘An author too, it seems. Whatever: he certainly could have done with the French gold back then. But it wasn’t there.’
   ‘The French found it before you?’
   ‘Looks that way, Inspector, and I must say, disappointed as I was, I feel only relief now.’
   ‘When was this?’
   ‘Summer ’24.’
   ‘So late?’
   ‘We needed time to find our feet again after the war, and it wasn’t easy for a German to travel to France in those first years. Inflation meant our money wasn’t worth anything.’ Grimberg had to pause, as a train rattled past his window. The rumble and squeal was hellishly loud. ‘Anyway, we were too late. No one wanted to believe the gold was gone. Wosniak even accused Meifert of having pinched it.’
   ‘The maths teacher?’
   ‘Minus Meifert might not have been the bravest, but he was crafty.’
   ‘You suspected each other?’
   ‘Initially perhaps, but little by little it became clear that none of us could have done it. We were too poor. Meifert was the one who said it. Look at us! Do we look rich? And, if one of uswere rich, would he be here now?’
   ‘In that case you must have suspected Roddeck. He wasn’t there.’
   ‘But his shadow was, and if anyone had said anything against his lieutenant, he’d have gone for their throat.’
   ‘More of an attack dog than a shadow then.’
   ‘If you like. No one fancied taking on Wosniak, but the truth is no one suspected Roddeck. He was a classic case of impoverished nobility. You think someone like that willingly goes into hotels and allows rich, fat and, worst of all,bourgeois women to bore him silly?’
   ‘You seem to know a lot about the German upper classes.’
   ‘I’ve encountered plenty of noblemen in uniform.’ He gave a scornful look. ‘Without that sort of baggage we might have won the war, and Germany certainly wouldn’t have such a bad reputation.’
   ‘I thought it was people like Captain Engel who dragged the country’s reputation through the mire. That’s what Roddeck writes, anyway.’
   ‘I’m in no position to judge.’
   ‘Did the captain own a trench dagger?’
   ‘Everyone who fought in the trenches did.’
   ‘Yes, but Engel’s was unique, wasn’t it?’
   ‘I don’t remember. All I know is that Engel was one of the few officers who didn’t shy away from trench warfare.’
   ‘Did he enjoy killing? Is that why he was known as Todesengel?’
   ‘He was called that because he was responsible for the casualties in Alberich territory. As was I, only I didn’t acquire a nickname.’
   ‘Because you weren’t an officer?’
   ‘Perhaps because I wasn’t Jewish either. Engel wasn’t popular in the troop, that’s true. He was too ambitious for a lot of them. Doesn’t take long to get a reputation. There were some who really hated him.’
   ‘What about you? Did you hate him?’
   ‘He was my commanding officer. Not best friend material, but hatred?’ Grimberg shook his head. ‘Captain Engel valued my work, and I respected him.’ Again he looked around as if someone might hear. ‘I know what you’re driving at, Inspector. Believe me, I’ve asked myself often enough.’
   ‘And?’
   Grimberg shrugged.‘A charge can always misfire once it’s primed. But… at that very instant?’ He looked at Rath as if he were expecting a follow-up question, but none came. ‘It happens more often than you might think. Even if it’s never talked about.’
   ‘What does?’
   ‘Soldiers killing their commanding officers and presenting it as an accident. It just takes someone unpopular enough, and a few like-minded souls. And an opportunity.’
   ‘But, killed for being… unpopular?’
   ‘If it’s someone who sends his men into battle without heed to the consequences, or who’s a brutal slave-driver… yes, at some point, that’s the type of man you’d want to kill.’
   ‘And Engel? Was he a brutal slave-driver?’
   ‘Not that I’m aware of. He was strict, arrogant perhaps, but he was hated because he was a Jew, and had dared to become a captain.’
   Rath thought of his former boss, Bernhard Weiss, whose safety was no longer guaranteed. Weiss, too, had emerged from the war as a highly decorated captain, a fact which only stoked the anti-Semitism of his opponents. The more patriotic Jews were, and the greater their sense of duty to the Fatherland, the more bitter the hatred became.
   ‘You have your suspicions?’
   ‘Like I said, Engel wasn’t held in very high regard.’
   ‘But someone must have been on hand to detonate the trap?’
   ‘Or they manipulated it and moved the wire to a different site, right at the entrance to the trenches.’ He looked at Rath. ‘If so, it must have been someone who didn’t care if Thelen and I were killed too. The fact that we were still standing by the car when Engel went in was pure coincidence. I should have been there, inspecting the traps with him.’
   ‘If itwas an attack…’ Rath considered, ‘could you have been a target?’
   ‘I was a nobody, Inspector. A man like me didn’t attract hatred or envy, but it must have been someone who thought my life was worthless.’
   ‘What about Thelen? Would he have stayed by the car whatever?’
   ‘That was how it was with the others we inspected. He was only the driver.’
   ‘Do you think he might have been capable? How was his relationship with Engel?’
   ‘You’d have to ask him yourself. I barely knew him. He was transferred to the Eastern Front shortly afterwards.’
   ‘You looked for Engel together…’
   ‘Yes, even though it was futile, burrowing through rubble like that. Then the British artillery started firing, and we made sure we got out.’
   ‘But no one saw the corpse?’
   ‘No.’
   ‘Did anyone look for him later?’
   ‘It wasn’t possible. The enemy was advancing. It was no longer German territory. Leaving an unidentified corpse behind like that, it happened all the time. Plenty more died agonising deaths, because no one could get to them.’
   ‘Would it be possible to survive one of your booby-traps?’
   ‘We always packed a lot of scrap metal around the explosive charge. Nails, sheet metal, old screws, things like that. Pretty lethal when it flies through the air.’ Grimberg spoke as if he were explaining the workings of a pressure cooker. ‘With a little luck, you could survive a hailstorm of metal like that,’ he said, adopting a sceptical expression. ‘The question is whether you’d want to. Sometimes, death can be a mercy.’
   49
   Charly stood at the window and looked at the full moon over Carmerstrasse and the gaslight below. Previously she might have gone out on an evening like this, perhaps met up with Greta or her former classmates, but somehow she didn’t feel like it. What was happening out there made her sick. It was as if a wicked conjuror had cast a spell on her beloved Berlin, and transformed it beyond recognition.
   The city she knew still existed; the people, the bars, the streets, but to access it she had to pass at least a dozen swastika flags, and tonight she couldn’t stomach it. Now that the election campaign was over, she hoped they would disappear and Berlin might begin to look normal again, and not like an occupied city. She couldn’t explain it, but she felt an almost bottomless aversion to the swastika, the symbol of the new party of government – and this despite its geometrically perfect form.
   These days Nazi flags even flew outside police headquarters; the black-red-and-gold of the Republic had served its time.Systemzeit was the name given to the years of the Republic, making it sound as if democracy were an aberration in German history.
   For Kirie’s sake she still left the house, of course. The dog had to be walked no matter what. After a long excursion following Gereon’s departure, tonight a brief stroll would have to suffice.
   Waiting for Kirie to perform her business, Charly gazed up at number 3, Steinplatz. The second floor windows were all dark. It was a week now since Bernhard Weiss had fled, but still she was worried.
   Late as it was, she decided not to return to Carmerstrasse but to take a detour to Uhlandstrasse. She rang on Adolf Weiss’s door, and it was some time before a maid opened. No doubt she was afraid it might be an SA wrecking crew.
   Adolf Weiss might not have said so as he received her, but fear was writ large on his face. The SA had been in Pension Teske already. Somehow, Weiss said, after the maid had brought tea and set a bowl down for Kirie, the brownshirts must have got wind that little Hilde Weiss had been staying there with her grandmother. Luckily Bernhard Weiss had left with his wife after a single night and fled to a friend’s house in Hamburg. Arriving too late, the SA had tried to take Hilde hostage and it was only through the intervention of a courageous lawyer guest that the situation had been resolved. His brother had returned soon after to collect his daughter and mother-in-law.
   ‘He was here?’ Charly asked, barely able to conceal her horror. ‘When the SA are out for his neck?’
   ‘He had to get his little girl.’
   The family were now on their way out of the country, stopping in a new city each day, never spending more than a single night in the same hotel. Adolf Weiss couldn’t say exactly where they were, or didn’t want to. Charly could understand why. Before taking her leave she asked him to send her best wishes when he could.
   Even in the moonlight there was no missing the flags on Steinplatz, and Charly was relieved to arrive home with Kirie. How empty the apartment felt without Gereon! She was missing him after just half a day.
   Kirie curled up in her basket and was already dozing when she turned on the radio and opened a bottle of red wine. She flopped onto Gereon’s favourite armchair. Tonight it belonged to her.
   There was only music on the radio, nothing on today’s vote. She lit a Juno and tried to read…
   …before catching herself staring out of the window, thinking dark thoughts, snapping awake as she gazed into the eyes of the woman reflected in the glass.
   My God, she thought. You’re becoming more and more like Gereon Rath. Sitting here drinking yourself to sleep, alone. At least she hadn’t started on the cognac. She had heard that, after a number of years together, spouses began to resemble one another. To think, they weren’t even married yet.
   Either way she couldn’t concentrate on the novel she was supposed to be reading, even though it was by no means bad. Her thoughts kept returning to the last few weeks, to all the Nazi spite and brutality. They had caught everyone off guard.Everyone, not just the Communists.
   The telephone rang. She lifted herself out of the chair and picked up the receiver, realising she was starting to sway slightly. Best hold off on the wine after this glass. It was Gereon.
   ‘Charly, how’s it going? How was your day?’
   ‘Lousy. How about yours? Were you successful?’
   ‘Define successful.’
   ‘Where are you now?’
   ‘Elberfeld. That is, Wuppertal, I should say. Just got to the hotel.’ She sensed there was something on his mind. ‘Charly,’ he began. ‘You like dancing, don’t you…’
   Where was he going with this?
   ‘Perhaps,’ he continued, ‘you could do me a favour?’
   50
   Rath gazed out of the window. You could see the Rhine from here, and the peaks of the Siebengebirge mountains. Was that the Drachenfels? The so-called Dragon’s Rock? Now the name of the road made sense. Eva Heinen, the widow Engel, lived in the Gronau district of Bonn, in a splendid villa on Drachenfelsstrasse, not far from the banks of the Rhine, but, according to the man-servant who opened the door, was currently indisposed.
   ‘I don’t know that the mistress can receive you. She’s very busy.’
   ‘I think she’ll make time. I’d hate to ask the mistress to accompany me to the police station.’
   Rath’s words worked like a charm, and soon the man was leading him up to the first floor, to a kind of drawing room, where he was asked to wait. He had been standing here ever since, smoking and gazing into the dawn. Towards the north the view was hampered by a modern building covered in scaffolding,but the Rhine panorama directly in front of the Heinen residence remained unspoiled.
   He turned from the window and ambled across the room to a photograph of a man in captain’s uniform, by his side an attractive, serious-looking woman; in front of them two children, a small curly-haired girl, and a boy of perhaps twelve who looked just as serious as his mother despite standing in front of a Christmas tree. Like many Jewish families, the Engels seemed to have celebrated Hanukkah like Christmas. Was this the last time they’d marked it as a family? Benjamin Engel had been missing since March 1917.
   December 1916 was also when the war diaries came to an end. Seeing them on the shelf Rath began leafing through them. Benjamin Engel’s estate: less stories of combat than everyday routine, and written in such a way as to be suitable for female readers, devoid of obscenity and the cruelties of war. A sanitised account for the family.
   The door opened after he’d finished his second cigarette, and the servant announced that the mistress would be with him presently. He just had time to return the notebooks to the shelf before she appeared.
   He recognised her from the photograph; a slender, dark-haired woman in her mid-forties whose natural elegance made him gasp. He almost kissed her hand, settling in the end for a simple‘Good morning.’
   Eva Heinen led him to a suite by the window and invited him to take a seat.
   ‘Jakobus, would you make some tea,’ she said, and the servant disappeared. ‘I was told you’d be here, Inspector – only, I’m afraid I must have misunderstood your colleagues from Bonn. It concerns my dead husband?’
   ‘That’s right, yes.’ Rath cleared his throat. He felt as if he had been blindsided. He’d hoped to begin on a more innocuous subject. ‘It’s… Frau Heinen, is it possible that your husband survived the war?’
   ‘What sort of question is that? Are you trying to mock me?’
   ‘Absolutely not. It’s just…We believe it’s possible that he wasn’t killed in action, and…’
   ‘Don’t you think I’d know about it? That Benjamin would have contacted me? His wife, his children?’
   ‘You have children with him?’ Rath asked, knowing that she did.
   ‘Two. Walther is studying in Berlin, Edith lives here with me. She’s just turned nineteen.’
   ‘Then your daughter was nine when you had your husband declared dead. It was ten years ago, am I right?’
   ‘Nine.’
   ‘Why did you do it?’
   ‘Why did I do what?’
   ‘Rob your children of a father.’
   ‘That was the war, not me.’
   ‘You had him declared dead without needing to.’
   ‘Why do you think I did it?’
   ‘You tell me.’
   ‘For seven years I clung to the hope that he might have survived. Can you imagine what that felt like?’
   Rath could imagine it all too well. His brother Anno had fallen in the first year of war; his mother had only accepted his death once she had seen her eldest son’s corpse.
   ‘What about your children? How did they take it?’
   ‘At some point you have to deal with the fact that reality doesn’t always care about your wishes. That’s why I had Benjamin declared dead. Because I couldn’t spend the rest of my life waiting for a ghost, and I couldn’t expect my children to either.’
   Rath was glad to see the maid appear with the tea and an opportunity to change tack. He waited until she had filled their cups and taken her leave.
   ‘I’d like to get a picture of your husband. How would you characterise him?’
   ‘How do you mean?’
   ‘Was he a quiet sort? Or more temperamental? Choleric, even?’
   ‘He was a quiet, gentle man. A little distant, perhaps. Some people thought he was arrogant as a result.’
   ‘Could he be cold-blooded?’
   ‘I don’t know what he was like in the war. I imagine he would have been as cold-blooded as any captain in the reserves.’
   ‘I mean in the sense of unscrupulous. Merciless.’
   ‘Inspector, I’m afraid I don’t understand what you’re getting at. Why don’t you just tell me what this is about, so I can answer your questions.’
   Rath sighed and told her about Achim von Roddeck’s war memoirs and what had been happening in Berlin. Eva Heinen listened without interrupting.
   ‘He shot three people? You don’t seriously believe that? This author of yours must be delirious.’
   ‘It’s the first you’ve heard of it?’ She nodded. ‘Soon the story will be available to read in the paper, and that, according to Roddeck, is why these people, these witnesses, are being murdered. Because your husband is alive, and means to hinder publication at any cost.’ Eva Heinen shook her head indignantly. ‘I realise it’s hard for you to conceive of your husband as a murderer, but believe me, if there’s one thing I have learned in all my years as a homicide detective, it is this: anyone can kill. In war, it goes without saying.’
   ‘This whole story… it can’t be true. Why, in all these years, has no one filed charges against him?’
   ‘Because the witnesses felt guilty on account of the theft, and when your husband died the following day, in their eyes justice was served.’
   ‘You believe he’s still alive, don’t you? So, what now?’
   ‘I believe in facts,’ Rath said. ‘But yes, there are former companions of your husband who believe it, two of whom have been murdered.’
   ‘Then catch their killer, but don’t chase a phantom. My husband is dead!’
   ‘I understand it’s hard for you to believe what I’m saying, but there are many clues which corroborate it.’
   ‘Such as?’
   ‘Did your husband own a trench dagger?’
   ‘I was never interested in that sort of thing. And he… he didn’t leave anything behind, no uniform, no weapons. Not even a body. We buried an empty coffin, down at the cemetery.’
   ‘The Jewish cemetery?’
   ‘No, why?’
   ‘Your husband was of the Mosaic faith…’
   ‘What makes you think that? Benjamin was baptised Roman Catholic before our wedding. My parents insisted on it, and he didn’t mind. He was never especially religious. Do you really think he could have become a reserve officer in the Prussian army as a Jew? It was only possible because he was baptised.’
   ‘He was still perceived as Jewish, and experienced difficulties because of it.’
   ‘Once a Jew, always a Jew… Perhaps people resented him for being allowed to serve as an officer.’
   ‘Perhaps.’
   ‘My husband wasn’t someone you could get close to.’ Eva Heinen sounded brusque. ‘And that had nothing to do with being Jewish.’
   ‘Roddeck describes your husband as cold and calculating, with a penchant for sadism.Todesengel, his unit called him.’
   ‘That doesn’t sound like the Benjamin I knew.’
   ‘Be that as it may…’ Rath sensed he wasn’t getting anywhere. He stood and handed the woman his card. ‘If your husband should be alive and contact you, please inform me immediately.’
   ‘Why would I do that? If I’ve understood correctly, you believe he’s a killer.’
   ‘Perhaps you’d do it to prove his innocence. If you’re so convinced of it.’
   ‘I’mconvinced that a dead man can’t kill, Inspector. I would advise you to pursue other leads.’
   He said his goodbyes and made for the door where Jakobus was waiting to see him out. Before Rath got into his car he looked up. Eva Heinen stood at the window watching him. She didn’t flinch as their eyes met, nor did she draw the curtain. She looked as if she meant to hypnotise him, or place him under a curse.
   51
   Charly’s first port of call on Monday morning was Registry. On the way she ran into Detective Kellermann from H Division, with whom she’d dealt regularly when she was still allowed to work for Gennat. ‘Charly,’ he said. ‘Long time no see. Here to inhale some dust?’
   ‘Looks that way. I see you’ve had your dose.’ A yellowing batch of files was wedged under his arm.
   ‘Thanks,’ he said, feigning a sneeze. She had always liked him.
   ‘What’s new in Warrants?’ she asked.
   ‘I’ve never chased so many Communists in my life. I’ll be surprised if they have the numbers for a revolution.’
   ‘Forget the Communists. What about thenational revolution?’
   Kellermann changed the subject.‘You’re interested in this fugitive arsonist, aren’t you? The one who escaped from Dalldorf?’ Perhaps he was worried about being overheard. Germany had become a nation of cowards.
   ‘Hannah Singer. Have you found her?’
   ‘No, but she was seen last week, on Thursday or Friday I think. At Bahnhof Zoo.’
   ‘Seen by whom?’
   ‘A witness recognised her and tried to detain her, but she got away. By the time police officers moved in she was long gone.’
   ‘What kind of witness?’
   ‘Take a look at the report.’ He winked. ‘It’s on Inspector Rath’s desk.’
   Not for the first time she realised her impending marriage to Gereon was an open secret.‘Thanks for the heads-up.’
   She hadn’t stopped thinking about Hannah Singer since her visit to Dalldorf, and had collected any information she could find on the girl. According to the files, Hannah was nine years old when her mother died, and things had gone downhill soon after. Within six months, she and her father, a rag-and-boneman who had lost the use of his legs during the war, were evicted from their flat. It wasn’t clear when they had wound up in the Crow’s Nest, but Hannah was first arrested for begging on the Weidendammer Bridge in autumn 1929. On that occasion she had been spared being committed to a home because her father appeared at the police station accompanied by Heinrich Wosniak, who pledged that he would look after the helpless father and his half-grown daughter.
   Charly had circled the name Wosniak where it appeared in the files. Hannah was starting to take shape. Even if the details were hard to verify, it was increasingly clear that she had endured a slave’s existence in the Crow’s Nest. An eleven-year-old girl living with thirty- to fifty-year-old men! It must have been hell. Selling matches in all weathers was probably the least of it. Setting fire to the shack on Bülowplatz had been a desperate attempt at freedom, but two of her tormentors had survived while her father perished. What must she have felt on seeing the image of the dead Heinrich Wosniak, and that of her father from a time when all this was still ahead? Charly was no psychologist, but the photos must have brought any number of memories to the surface, and triggered Hannah’s episode soon after.
   She felt infinitely sympathetic towards this girl with eight lives on her conscience, and certainly didn’t view her as a killer. Perhaps she wasn’t even mad, just damaged at her very core.
   The thought stayed with her in Registry as she searched half-heartedly for the files that were next on her and Karin’s list. More gangs of youths… It was almost as if, buoyed by her success with the Red Rats, Friederike Wieking intended to wipe out every wild posse going.
   Having joked about it moments before, the odour of dust now made Charly sick for real. Returning to her office with the files, she didn’t even have to put on a show.
   ‘Charly, what’s wrong?’ Karin van Almsick asked.
   ‘What do you mean?
   ‘You look terrible. Do you not feel well?’
   ‘I just threw up.’
   ‘Perhaps you’d better go home.’
   ‘I was off work just recently.’
   ‘There isn’t much to do right now. The Rats are behind bars. The worst is over.’
   Charly set the pile of files on Karin’s desk. ‘But off work, again… what will Wieking say?’
   ‘Well, I have my suspicions there… but don’t worry, my lips are sealed!’
   ‘What suspicions?’
   Karin grinned.‘Ever thought you might be… I mean, have you… could you be… ah… in the family way?’
   ‘God forbid!’ She didn’t mean to sound so appalled.
   ‘I know you two aren’t married yet, but…’ Karin looked to the side in embarrassment. ‘Well, you’re not that strict, are you?’
   ‘Pregnant…’ Charly shook her head. ‘That’s all I need.’
   ‘There’s no point torturing yourself here. Maybe you should go to the doctor.’
   A quarter of an hour later, Charly waited for the S-Bahn at Alexanderplatz with Kirie on her lead, a pile of files under her arm, and a satisfied smile on her face. She had struggled to hold it together inside. Pregnant! If only Karin van Almsick knew what measures she was taking to prevent it, that in Paris she’d even had an abortion… which was something Gereon could never know about.
   Kirie had wagged her tail when she realised they were heading out again. Usually she didn’t get a walk until lunchtime. Despite looking sceptical when Charly mentioned taking documents home for Inspector Rath, Erika Voss had handed everything over, even the file Gereonhadn’t requested yesterday evening. Either he knew nothing about the recent sighting of Hannah Singer, or he still wasn’t interested.
   Leaving the S-Bahn at Savignyplatz Charly made for Carmerstrasse, where she put on coffee and started leafing through the file from Warrants. Right now that was the one that counted, not Gereon’s dossier on Achim von Roddeck.
   The name of the witness who had sighted Hannah at Bahnhof Zoo wasn’t noted anywhere. He had disappeared before the cops on the ground could take his particulars. Even so, it seemed clear that it was, indeed, Hannah he had seen. Her clothes were more or less a match for those stolen from the Jonass Department Store, where she’d left behind her nightshirt and cleaning overalls, both of which she’d worn since Dalldorf. The dark blue coat was more of a mystery, and hadn’t been reported missing from either Jonass or the asylum. From Bahnhof Zoo she had apparently taken a tram to Wilmersdorf, where the trail was lost.
   Charly wrote the names of the cops in her notebook, along with the description of the witness, helped herself to one of the police photos of Hannah, and went on her way. She felt certain that Wilmersdorf was a red herring; Hannah’s life had centred around northern and eastern Berlin, and the area around Bülowplatz. No, Charly’s starting point would be Bahnhof Zoo. Clearly Hannah had business there, perhaps selling her body to make ends meet.
   Kirie seemed to be enjoying her newfound freedom to roam. Before turning down Hardenbergstrasse Charly asked the newspaper vendor at Steinplatz for a copy of theKreuzzeitung.
   ‘Sold out. Went like hot cakes this morning. You might get one at the train station.’
   ‘That’s where I’m headed anyway.’
   ‘Interested in the new serial?’
   ‘My husband is.’
   Five minutes later she found herself back at Bahnhof Zoo, one of the ugliest but busiest train stations in Berlin. It was an affluent part of town but, if you kept your eyes peeled, you could see any number of street children begging, selling dubious goods, sometimes even themselves, or simply loitering around. She made the rounds with Hannah’s photo. ‘Excuse me, do you know this girl?’
   All she received were head shakes and the odd comment.‘Lady, why don’t you just give me a mark? I don’t need these questions.’
   She carried on undeterred, asking not only youths but also war veterans who had sacrificed their health in the trenches and now competed for the sympathy of passers-by. Charly found it increasingly hard not to give these pitiful wretches money. Poor souls… although the youths were just as pitiful, none of them knowing where they would spend the night, only that they preferred this existence to the prospect of life in the protectory. Which is where they would find themselves if arrested.
   That was unlikely, however. Unless they felt passers-by were being unduly harassed, the police let the kids do as they pleased, although the SA auxiliary officer next to the two beat cops, German Shepherd on its lead beside him, might have other ideas. The SA was unpredictable, which explained why its men inspired such respect – or such fear.
   A red-haired boy who was begging in a cheeky, but charming, way had been watching her out of the corner of his eye.‘Excuse me, lady,’ he said, ‘but I lost my ticket and mother is waiting for me at home in Bernau. You wouldn’t have ten pfennig for a poor apprentice lad?’
   ‘You’re an apprentice, are you? What are you doing out here, then?’ The clock by the underpass showed a quarter past twelve.
   ‘Baker’s apprentice,’ he said cheekily. He had a strong Berlin accent.
   Aware that he was lying through his teeth, Charly reached inside her purse for a ten-pfennig coin. Before handing it over, she showed him the photo.‘Do you know this girl?’
   ‘Why would I? Does she look like a baker to you?’
   ‘She spends a lot of time here. Her name is Hannah.’
   ‘What’s she done?’
   ‘What do you mean?’
   ‘Well,you’re looking for her, which means you’re either her mother or from Welfare, and you’re not her mother.’
   He made the word‘Welfare’ sound like a contagious disease. His eyes flitted this way and that, ready to make a run at any moment.
   ‘Wrong on both counts.’ Charly smiled. ‘I’m from the police. I want to help you.’
   ‘Understood. Your friendly local police department. So, she has done something?’
   ‘I think there’s someone after her.’
   ‘Why are you telling me this? I don’t know the girl.’
   ‘Are you sure?’ She looked him in the eye, certain he was lying. He must care about Hannah, or he’d have bolted by now.
   ‘Lady, you expect me to remember every face that passes through? That’s a whole lot of people. It’s not like I lose my ticket every day.’
   She handed him the coin, along with a piece of paper with her name and address.‘If you happen to see her, tell her that Charlotte Ritter from the police knows that she’s in danger. She needn’t worry that I’ll have her sent back.’
   ‘Sent back?’
   ‘To Dalldorf.’
   The boy looked surprised. Hannah obviously hadn’t told him about her past, but who tells someone they’ve escaped from a mental asylum, or that they have eight people on their conscience? He grinned at her and strolled off, slowly increasing his pace until he was almost running. He looked like someone trying to catch a train.
   She waited until the SA officer had stubbed out his cigarette and continued on his way before speaking to the two beat cops. The German Shepherd barked at Kirie, but the auxiliary officer tipped his SA cap by way of apology and smiled. So, friendly Nazis did exist, and they had reason to be cheerful since, as of today, they had control of the town halls as well as the Reich Chancellery. She produced her identification.
   ‘Are you from Warrants?’ the cop said. ‘They pestered the hell out of us the day before yesterday. Not thatthey found the little brat either.’
   ‘No, no. Women’s CID.’
   ‘We have to find her before Welfare get involved.’
   ‘Welfare’ was all G Division was to her male colleagues. She swallowed her anger. ‘This man who saw her, what was he like?’.
   ‘He had a lot of facial scars. A war veteran if you ask me.’
   ‘Like one of them?’ Charly gestured towards the beggars at the station.
   ‘He was much better dressed, but his face was a sight. He had a limp too.’
   ‘Yet he managed to get away before you could take down his personal particulars.’
   ‘We couldn’t have known he’d take off, and we had to report to Alex and our colleagues in Wilmersdorf. There was plenty to do.’
   ‘Don’t you think it’s strange that a witness should slip away like that? After making such a song and dance about having the girl detained.’
   ‘He’ll have had his reasons. Maybe didn’t want his old lady to know he’d been hanging around Bahnhof Zoo.’
   ‘How did he know the girl then? Did he say? There weren’t any pictures of her in the papers.’
   ‘He was gone before we had the chance to ask.’
   52
   Rath needed less than half an hour to reach Cologne. Adenauer’s new automobile highway, the Kraftwagenstrasse, made it seem as if Bonn were a suburb of Cologne, rather than a city thirty kilometres away. The four-lane road, including twenty kilometres without an intersection, was intended to promote the city’s modernisation and create employment in difficult times. In the summer his father had asked him to attend the opening. Like the Rosenmontag invitation, it was an attempt to integrate him into Cologne’s inner circle, but a gunshot wound to his shoulder, a painful reminder of his adventures in Masuria, had served as a convenient excuse.
   It was fun driving the Buick at full speed again. The last time had been on the AVUS in Berlin. It wasn’t until Bonner Strasse, Cologne’s southern arterial road, that he took his foot off the gas. The city had changed in the two weeks since he had left. The closer he came to the Rings, the wide boulevards that encircled Cologne’s centre, the more swastikas he saw, and not just on public buildings. The Nazis were everywhere. Only a few weeks ago city workers had removed unauthorised flags from the bridge. Try it now, and they would find themselves in the Rhine.
   Apart from the swastikas though, the city looked the same. Maybe not that much had changed after all. There was no point getting worked up. He parked outside the entrance at Sudermanstrasse, and felt his guilty conscience and a host of unpleasant memories stir. A helpful female assistant, whom he had never seen before, opened the door and smiled at him. He placed a finger to his lips.‘I’m a friend,’ he said, and gestured towards the office door. ‘I wanted to surprise Herr Wittkamp.’
   His knock was met with a weary‘come in’. Rath entered the office, the sight of which triggered yet more memories: wine bottles, mouse ears, the morning after the night before… Paul was entering something in a thick notebook. ‘What can I do for you?’ he asked without looking up.
   ‘Look at you, starving away. How about I buy you lunch?’
   Paul looked up, wide-eyed.‘You? Forget your toothbrush in the rush?’
   ‘I guess I owe you an explanation.’
   ‘An apology will do. There isn’t a lot to explain.’
   ‘Ha! I thought it was the other way round.’ Paul looked at him angrily. ‘Anyway,’ Rath continued. ‘I thought I’d buy us lunch. My way of putting things right. What do you think, or have I come at a bad time?’
   ‘You always come at a bad time. It’s never stopped you in the past.’ Paul screwed the lid back on his fountain pen and stood up. ‘Or me, for that matter.’
   Weinhaus Brungs was near the town hall, a tavern which had opened in the rooms of a long-established in-house brewery that had recently ceased production. Seats and tables were made from wine cases, which gave an authentic feel.
   ‘Clients of yours?’ Rath asked once they had taken their seats.
   ‘Of course. It’s win-win. You buy me lunch, they re-order my stock.’
   ‘Let’s not go wild. It’s only lunchtime – and it’s Lent.’
   ‘Fish it is, then,’ Paul said. ‘I hear the troutau bleu is very good.’
   The waiter arrived with the menus, and Paul ordered a bottle of Moselle.
   ‘One of yours?’ Rath asked once the waiter was gone.
   ‘My best drop,’ said Paul. Rath had an inkling this wouldn’t be cheap. ‘So, you want to straighten things out?’
   ‘Why do you think I’m here? This wine tastes pretty expensive.’
   ‘I mean with the girl.’
   ‘How do you propose I do that?’
   ‘What about gently informing her that you have no future as a couple.’
   ‘She’ll have guessed that by now.’
   ‘Perhaps. But there’s guessing and there’s knowing… It’s time you cleaned up your own mess for a change.’
   ‘You’re right.’
   ‘I’m not just talking about poor Hilde.’
   ‘What do you want me to do? I can hardly tell Charly.’
   ‘God forbid!’ Paul looked at him with unusual seriousness. ‘Didn’t I say you’d have me to deal with if you ever pull a stunt like this again?’
   ‘Whose witness are you anyway?’
   ‘I’m serious, Gereon.’
   ‘Yeah, yeah, I get it. I’ll just have to forget about Carnival as a married man.’
   ‘If this is how it ends, maybe you should.’
   ‘The Nazis will ban it anyway.’
   ‘Why?’
   ‘Sense of humour isn’t really their thing.’
   ‘Adenauer’s hardly Carnival’s greatest fan either. Andhe collected money so that the parade could take place this year. The powers-that-be know how to make themselves popular…’
   ‘I wonder if it always works like that…’
   ‘Not for Adenauer anyway.’
   Paul fell silent. The waiter came with their dishes and poured more wine.
   ‘Has Adenauer been voted out?’ Rath asked once the waiter had disappeared.
   Paul looked around.‘Let’s not discuss it here,’ he said.
   They ate in silence, and by the time they were finished they had emptied the bottle. Rath looked out of the window as people filed past, many of them in brown uniforms.‘What’s this?’ he asked. ‘They’re heading for the town hall, aren’t they?’
   Paul placed his napkin to one side.‘No idea, but let’s go. I need to get back.’
   The bill made a dent in Rath’s wallet, but he left a decent tip all the same. Could he put the meal on expenses? He pocketed the receipt.
   He hadn’t managed to find a space in the narrow alleyway in front of the restaurant and had parked a few metres down the road by the town hall, where an enormous throng was now gathered. His car was surrounded. ‘What’s going on?’ he asked a passer-by.
   ‘Haven’t you heard?’ The man had a thick Cologne accent. ‘The party occupied the town hall this morning. Adenauer’s scarpered.’
   ‘Which party?’ Rath asked. Stupid question.
   ‘Dr Riesen is mayor now.’
   ‘The Nazi? That’s why all these people are here?’
   ‘He’s going to make a speech about what’s going to happen in Cologne, now that Adenauer and his cronies are gone.’
   ‘I never thought the Nazis would get a majority in Cologne,’ he said to Paul across the roof of the car.
   ‘They didn’t, not even with the German National People’s Party.’
   ‘Then how come they get to pick the new mayor?’
   Paul waited until they were inside the Buick with both doors closed and Rath had the engine running.‘The Nazis took the town hall this morning by force. Adenauer did well to stay away. They might just have put him up against a wall, like they were threatening last time you were here.’
   Rath rarely discussed politics with Paul, and was relieved his friend couldn’t stand the Nazis either. ‘In Catholic Cologne of all places. I thought they voted Centre here.’
   ‘Not by a long shot. The police even banned them from holding a rally on Friday. Adenauer’s final campaign speech was cancelled. Even he could no longer do anything about the swastika flags on his town hall. Things have been frantic since the Reichstag vote.’
   Rath manoeuvred the Buick out of its space and through the milling mass at a snail’s pace. It took some time before he had a clear run, and people could be seen again on the pavements. People going about their daily business without uniforms or flags. There was still such a thing as normal. The crowds outside the town hall had seemed so unreal it was as if all this were happening in another city – in another world.
   At Platz der Republik he stopped to let Paul out.‘Braunsfeld,’ his friend said, leaning over the window. ‘Blumhoffer Nachfolger. Hildegard Sprenger, Sales.’
   Rath gave a wry smile, and saluted.‘Aye, aye, Sir!’
   He drove on, lost in thought, without the slightest idea how he was going to tell this girl, whom he hadn’t seen for two weeks, that she was just a one-night stand. Stopping at a florist, he bought a small bouquet and drove via Aachener Strasse to Braunsfeld. The lemonade factory wasn’t as big as he’d expected. Trucks were being loaded on the yard, but with metal barrels rather than bottle crates. He asked the porter for Fräulein Sprenger from Sales, concealing the flowers behind his back.
   ‘First floor, second door on the right.’
   Hilde Sprenger looked at him wide-eyed as he peered through the door. Annoyingly she wasn’t alone; a female colleague sat at the desk opposite. ‘Now, there’s a surprise,’ she said. ‘Are they for me?’
   ‘The porter actually, but he didn’t want them.’ She laughed a perfectly nice, normal laugh. ‘I thought I might buy you a coffee, seeing as I was in the area. Do you have time?’
   The woman at the other desk pretended not to be interested. Hilde stood up and smoothed down her dress.‘A quarter of an hour, for sure. I was about to take a break anyway. There’s a cafe on Aachener Strasse.’ He handed her the flowers. ‘Hedwig, could you put these in water for me?’ Her colleague took the bouquet with a grin. ‘Are you in town long?’ she asked, when they were outside.
   ‘No.’ Rath didn’t know what else to add.
   ‘Then you’re lucky you found me. I’m on holiday next week.’
   ‘You are?’ He cleared his throat. ‘Do you mean the cafe up ahead? It looks nice.’
   This time they ordered coffee rather than Afri-Cola. Hilde took a cigarette from her handbag and he gave her a light. She smiled nervously and smoked. He flipped open his cigarette case.‘You’ve already realised I’m not Paul Wittkamp,’ he said. ‘I’m sorry I couldn’t clear that up before, I was called away unexpectedly. I hope it wasn’t too much of a shock.’
   ‘It’s my own fault, going back like that, but I was curious. I wanted to see you again.’
   ‘I’m not even from Cologne. I’m a Berliner.’
   ‘You don’t sound like one.’
   ‘I grew up in Klettenberg.’
   ‘A Cologne boy after all.’
   ‘Before I lapsed.’
   Hilde grew misty-eyed.‘Berlin,’ she sighed, as if these two syllables held all the promise of the world. ‘Lucky you.’
   ‘How so?’
   ‘Right in the heart of the metropolis.’
   ‘If you say so.’
   ‘Well then, have you seen him?’
   ‘Seen who?’
   ‘Who do you think? The Führer, of course!’ There was such enthusiasm in her eyes it was as if she were discussing Willy Fritsch. ‘I just wondered. Weren’t you at the Reich Chancellery? In January, I mean, when he stood at the window.’
   ‘I had to work.’ He had got caught in the Nazis’ torchlight procession on the way home, but he didn’t want to mention that. This wasn’t what they were supposed to be discussing. The conversation had taken an unwanted turn, not that Hilde had noticed.
   ‘Isn’t it wonderful that the national revolution has reached Cologne?’ she asked. ‘That Adenauer and his Jew cronies are out on their ears at last?’
   Rath’s cigarette almost fell out of his mouth. Hilde didn’t look like a Nazi zealot. He’d thought she was a modern girl, fun-loving and open to adventure, and that Nazi girls wore bunches, not bobs.
   ‘My family is on very good terms with Konrad Adenauer,’ he said sharply. ‘And to my knowledge he’s no Jew. As for his cronies…’
   ‘Did I say something wrong? Sorry, I shouldn’t have started on politics.’
   Perhaps the conversation hadn’t taken such an unwanted turn after all. He stood up with such a sudden aversion to this naive Hitler-worshipper that his next move came easy. ‘I’m sorry. I thought we had something in common, but it seems I was wrong.’
   He laid a two mark coin on the table, more than enough for the bill, snatched his hat and coat from the stand and left. He didn’t look around, but caught sight of Hilde Sprenger gazing after him in the reflective glass. She probably thoughtshe had messed up with a single, ill-advised comment. With politics.
   Well, it was no bad thing if at least one person in Cologne had cause to temper their Nazi enthusiasm. Above all, Rath was glad to have this business behind him, even if things hadn’t turned out as expected – but perhaps that was no bad thing either.
   53
   The tea dance began at five on the dot in Hotel Eden, and Charly was all dressed up. The risk of running into a colleague who might squeal to Wieking in a place like this was low; the cost, on the other hand, would be high. She had told Gereon as much on the telephone, but he had said it wasn’t important so long as she came away with a result.
   Somehow she’d let herself be talked into going it alone! He was right, though, he’d never manage to prise her away from G Division officially, and there was no doubt that undercover operations had their appeal. This particular operation was so undercover that not even police knew about it. Still, what could they do? It was only dancing… for all that she was supposed to be ill.
   She had left Kirie with the porter and walked fifteen minutes to the hotel, saving the taxi fare. The afternoon would be pricey enough. The Eden advertised itself as‘the most modern luxury hotel in West Berlin’, and it was certainly among the most expensive.
   She went straight from the cloakroom to the ballroom, taking her place at one of the tables near the dancefloor. She ordered a glass of house champagne, lit a cigarette and looked around. The band was already playing, and the room was filling even though it was only a few minutes after five. It was mostly women at the tables, the majority of whom wore expectant looks, until the first gallants arrived and led them to the floor. It seemed to Charly as if the dancers chose the most ardent looking women. Certainly they weren’t interested in the smokers. She stubbed out her Juno and tried to look keen. Before long a pomaded, southern-looking type with a pencil moustache arrived and essayed a perfect bow. A peacock, the kind she’d usually have sent packing.
   ‘May I have this dance?’
   She smiled, reached for the man’s outstretched hand and stood up. The band played Latin American. She would have preferred Jazz, but that was asking too much at five in the afternoon.
   She didn’t know the dance, but it wasn’t an issue. Her partner held her firmly and, thanks to his steady hand, her legs did what they were supposed to. No comparison with Gereon, whose range just about extended to the slow numbers.
   ‘The lady dances well.’
   ‘Entirely thanks to you.’
   His response was a self-satisfied smile. Conversation wasn’t his strong point. Charly chose to lead. ‘What’s your name?’ she asked.
   Her pomaded gigolo gave her a conspiratorial glance.‘Just ask for Bertrand,’ he whispered.
   ‘From France?’
   ‘Brussels.’
   ‘How about Achim von Roddeck? Will I find him here too?’
   Just ask for Bertrand looked confused at first, then insulted.‘No, not anymore.’
   ‘They say he’s an author these days.’
   His face told her he didn’t wish to discuss a former colleague, but nor did he wish to rebuff her. Or perhaps he wasn’t allowed. He smiled sourly. ‘I’m sorry, but I don’t know a lot about Herr von Roddeck.’
   He wheeled her across the dancefloor. Charly tried again.‘Can you make a living from it? Dancing, I mean?’
   This time Bertrand didn’t even manage a sour smile, just looked thoroughly peeved. ‘I am dancing with you, because there is nothing I enjoy more in this world than dancing,’ he said. ‘And because the lady is a very talented dancer.’
   And because you’d be on the breadline otherwise, Charly thought. ‘Why did Roddeck dance?’
   ‘I can only hazard a guess.’
   ‘Then hazard away.’
   The dance was at an end, and with an elegant turn the Belgian snapped her backwards, catching her in his hands just as she feared she might hit the ground. The other dancers applauded. His eyes glared at her as he escorted her back to the table, but his mouth was smiling.‘Why are you quizzing me about a colleague?’ he asked.
   ‘Well…’ Charly attempted a smile of her own. ‘You’ve got me.’ She looked at the ground in shame. ‘I’m a journalist,’ she said. ‘My paper asked me to write a feature on Achim von Roddeck’s former life. That’s why I’m here.’
   For a moment she feared he might call for the house detective.‘If that’s how it is, you shouldn’t waste your time dancing,’ he said. ‘Come back at eight o’clock when my colleagues and I eat dinner. You can ask your questions there. Willy can tell you more about Roddeck than me.’
   ‘Willy?’ she looked around.
   ‘He won’t be here until the evening.’
   Again, Bertrand looked a little piqued. Charly pressed a five mark coin into the palm of his hand.‘Thank you,’ she said, shaking his hand. ‘Hopefully your colleague is just as discreet.’
   ‘Discreet…’ he said, stowing the coin swiftly away, ‘…we dancers are only discreet where our female clients are concerned.’ He managed a smile that wasn’t sour. ‘Colleagues, on the other hand, are fair game.Especially former ones.’
   Bertrand from Brussels made for the next table, bowing elegantly before a buxom blonde and leading her to the dance floor.
   ‘The lady dances well,’ Charly heard him say, as the two glided past. She drained her champagne, set down the glass, placed a two-mark coin on the table and left the room. The female cloak room attendant gazed at her in astonishment. It was probably the first time anyone had left the five o’clock tea dance at this hour, at least without a companion.
   54
   Arriving in Klettenberg, Rath hesitated a moment before ringing the front door. Frieda opened and looked at him wide-eyed.
   ‘Young man. Back again I see.’
   ‘Just passing through.’
   ‘I’m glad you’re here. We’re going out of our minds inside.’
   She let him in and fetched his parents. Engelbert Rath looked as if he hadn’t slept, greeting his son as if he had seen him only five minutes before, and disappearing into his study.
   ‘You must excuse Father,’ Erika Rath said. ‘The last few days have been a little frantic.’
   ‘Why isn’t he at police headquarters?’
   ‘He called in sick. They know he’s a friend of Adenauer, and given Elfgen says he can no longer guarantee Konrad’s safety, your father fears the worst.’
   ‘The district president said that?’
   ‘The very same, but don’t go thinking Elfgen is actuallydoing anything about the brownshirts. It’s white feathers all around.’
   Rath couldn’t help but smile. ‘Sounds like someone here didn’t vote for the Nazis. Am I right?’
   ‘Of course not! What are you thinking?’
   After what he had seen earlier, her outrage did him the power of good.‘It’s all right, Mama, I was only teasing.’
   ‘Your father’s party colleagues have been calling all day.’ She led her son into the sitting room where Frieda had laid out a pot of tea. ‘What are you doing here anyway?’
   ‘Police business.’
   ‘You’ll stay the night?’
   ‘If it’s no trouble.’
   ‘Trouble? Of course not… Wait! There was something.’ She stood up and went to the drawer to fetch a letter. ‘This came for you. We were going to send it on to Berlin, but seeing as you’re here…’
   Rath looked at the envelope. Cologne Police Headquarters.‘What is it?’
   ‘I don’t know.’
   ‘But Papa must.’
   ‘I didn’t want to bother your father with it. He has enough on his plate at the moment.’
   He opened the envelope. It was a summons. A Detective Wiefelspütz from the Cologne Police wished to speak with him. One Herr Wilhelm Klefisch had accused him of misappropriating fifty marks from his wallet.
   ‘What is it, son?’
   ‘Nothing important.’ He stowed the letter in his jacket.
   Engelbert Rath didn’t join them until supper, seeming tired but restless at the same time. Rath had never seen him unshaven before. His father had even managed on the black day they received news of Anno’s death.
   ‘I’m sorry I’m in such a mess, Gereon, but the telephone has been ringing for days and nights on end.’
   ‘I hear Adenauer’s been deposed.’
   ‘That’s what Gauleiter Grohe says. The brown mob stormed the town hall this morning.’ Engelbert Rath shrugged his shoulders as if to apologise. ‘Ever since the Reichstag elections, the SA have been behaving as if they own the city.’
   ‘And you’re letting them?’
   ‘What do you meanyou?’
   ‘The police. The Centre Party.You!’
   ‘What would you have us do?’
   ‘Help Adenauer. Prevent the town hall from being stormed.’
   ‘Our hands are tied, boy. The district president has instructed police to avoid any conflict with the SA. Anything else would lead to bloodshed.’ Engelbert Rath sat in his armchair, hunched and helpless.
   ‘That’s it?’
   ‘You don’t know what’s been happening here. It’s as if everything’s been turned on its head.’
   ‘Elfgen’s a Centrist, isn’t he?’
   ‘Of course he is,’ Engelbert Rath said, as if the prospect of the Cologne District President belonging to any other party were simply unthinkable.
   ‘Yet here he is playing into Nazi hands?’
   ‘Some party members believe we must movewith the national uprising and steer it in the right direction, rather than stand in its way.’
   ‘By working with people who would have Konrad Adenauer up against a wall?’
   ‘Gereon, you don’t understand…’
   There was a knock and Frieda peered through the crack in the door.‘Apologies, but it’s urgent. You’re wanted on the telephone. The mayor.’
   ‘Adenauer?’
   ‘Who else?’
   Frieda looked appalled. In her world Konrad Adenauer was still mayor of Cologne. Rath found it equally hard to imagine someone else in the post. It felt almost as if God himself had been dethroned. For as long as he could remember the mayor here had been Konrad Adenauer, and for as long as he could remember the man had been a regular in the Rath household. Only two weeks ago he had been drinking Frieda’s tea.
   Engelbert Rath stood up.‘Excuse me, but I’ve been waiting to hear from Konrad all day. Let’s hope he’s arrived safely in Berlin.’
   ‘Adenauer is in Berlin?’
   ‘The brownshirts would have shot him here.’
   ‘Then what’s he doing in Berlin, of all places? Talk about the lion’s den. If you think the Nazis have taken over Cologne, wait till you see things there.’
   ‘What do you think he’s doing? He’s going to call on the Prussian Interior Ministry and protest against what is happening here. Konrad is still the rightful mayor, and president of the Prussian State Council besides.’
   ‘Call on the Interior Ministry? On Göring?’
   ‘Who else?’
   ‘But he’s a Nazi too!’
   ‘As well as being acting Interior Minister. He won’t like hearing how the SA have been carrying on down here. He’ll do something about it.’
   Suddenly Rath realised that his father, once so in control of this city, had lost his political compass.
   55
   Charly entered the ballroom of the Hotel Eden just after eight o’clock. A new band played softly, there were no dancers and only a few guests, all of whom sat at the tables. An army of waiters prepared for the evening ahead. She waved one over.
   ‘Sorry, but the dancers – could you tell me where they eat?’
   The waiter looked at her disparagingly. Perhaps he thought she was a girlfriend of one of the men. No doubt that sort of thing was frowned upon here. The dancers didn’t dine with their clients in the hall but had their own table in the basement, just by the kitchen. In the servants’ quarters, where they were joined at the long table by liftboys, chambermaids, porters and other hotel staff. Just no waiters, right now they had their hands full.
   The dancers were already in evening dress and a little apart from the rest. Charly’s gallant from the afternoon spotted her and stood up. ‘There you are,’ he said, stretching out a hand with such perfect elegance she was afraid he might request a second dance. Instead he led her around the table and made the introductions. ‘Gentlemen, this is the reporter I mentioned earlier, Fräulein…’
   ‘Weinert,’ Charly said. It was the only name she could think of.
   ‘Fräulein Weinert is writing an article on our former colleague Roddeck, who, as we know, is currently making waves as an author.’
   The dancers in the Eden were a motley bunch, bound only by their polished manners and more or less attractive appearance. Their table, meanwhile, was so full of gossip they could have been taking coffee at Kranzler. Everyone had a story to tell. She sat down between Bertrand and a blond youth he introduced as Willy from Vienna.
   ‘The lieutenant… he was quite a fellow,’ the blond said with admiration. ‘Certainly knew how to swoop.’
   ‘To swoop?’
   ‘Weswoop on a lady when we ask them to dance,’ Bertrand explained, eyeing Willy angrily.
   Charly made notes, having purchased a reporter’s pad at Bahnhof Zoo. It was the same kind as the one Berthold Weinert used, and he was the only reporter she knew.
   ‘Anyway,’ the Viennese continued, ‘Roddeck had an eye for ladies with a bit of loose change.’
   ‘Willy is implying,’ Bertrand interrupted, ‘that Roddeck received the largest tips.’
   ‘Right,’ Willy continued, ‘because he knew who would pay out.’
   ‘He made a decent living, then…’
   ‘Yes, above all since the Countess took him under her wing.’
   ‘The Countess?’
   ‘She isn’t really a Countess,’ Bertrand said.
   ‘No, she’s just rich,’ Willy explained. ‘Name’s de Graaf or something. Used to be a regular here.’
   ‘She became Achim von Roddeck’s dance partner?’
   ‘Not only that, if you ask me,’ Willy said, receiving another sideways glance from Bertrand.
   ‘She was his lover?’
   ‘It isn’t unheard of for a client to take up with a dancer,’ Bertrand said. ‘If they’re discreet enough, it can work out – at least, for a time.’
   ‘I see.’ Charly made notes, until she saw Betrand’s shocked expression. ‘Don’t worry,’ she said. ‘I can be discreet too. This is all background information to build a better picture of Herr Roddeck.’
   Background information. She had the expression from Weinert, and had experienced its meaning for herself. The pigeon droppings that had triggered Böhm’s exile to Köpenick.
   ‘He continued to work here as a dance host,’ Willy went on. ‘Only, he looked after the same client more or less every night. The Countess. They danced together, drank together, ate together, and disappeared together afterwards.’
   ‘Doesn’t sound very discreet,’ Charly said.
   Willy shrugged.‘Management turned a blind eye. They didn’t want to lose the Countess. She didn’t just dance at the hotel, she was a resident here too.’
   ‘How long did this go on?’
   ‘Two or three years.’
   ‘Then management stopped turning a blind eye?’ she asked. ‘Or why else was Roddeck dismissed?’
   ‘He wasn’t dismissed,’ Willy said. ‘The Countess dropped him like a hot potato.’
   ‘She did?’
   ‘These things happen. After that the lieutenant had a little trouble rejoining the ranks.’
   ‘Why?’
   ‘His colleagues first of all. We hardly treated him like the prodigal son, as I’m sure you can imagine. All those years thinking he was better than us. But no, the real reason for his demise was that he no longer had the ladies at his feet.’
   ‘He couldn’t just… swoop in… wherever he pleased?’
   ‘He was assigned to other, less lucrative tables. When you start getting rejected there, you know the writing’s on the wall.’
   Bertrand hunched his shoulders. It seemed almost like an apology.‘That’s how it is in our line of work, you just have to deal with it. At some point the years catch up with you.’ He looked so wistful he might have been referring to himself.
   ‘Is that why the Countess gave him the boot? His age?’
   ‘Who knows?’ said Willy. ‘Either way, she keeps a different private dancer these days.Der schöne Sigismund.’ Handsome Sigismund.
   ‘Sigismund? Like in the song?’ she blurted out, before looking around and whispering. ‘Is he here?’
   Willy laughed.‘No, no. After breaking with the lieutenant the Countess packed her bags and left. Sigismund dances at the Belvedere.’
   56
   On Eigelstein the whores stood outside the corner bars just as they always had, chatting up passing men regardless of age. Rath put off those who looked his way with a friendly smile. Here Cologne still felt like the Cologne of old; away from all the Nazi commotion life went on as before. A lone swastika flag flew at the far end of the street above the medieval city gate. The smell of mash from the nearby brewery hung in the air.
   This time he was in luck. The shop was open. Master Watchmaker Eduard Schürmann looked up in surprise when he saw who had entered with the chime of the bell. ‘Inspector!’
   ‘Ede! Pleased to see you, and what a fine morning it is.’
   ‘Certainly, Inspector!’ The watchmaker was friendliness personified. ‘What can I do for you?’
   ‘I was hoping you could fix something.’
   ‘Your lovely wristwatch? It looks brand new.’
   ‘It’s this business with the wallet. You remember?’
   Ede tried his best to look stupid.‘Of course! Tietz, wasn’t it?’
   ‘You do remember? Oh good. Then perhaps you can tell me where those fifty marks have got to.’
   ‘What are you talking about? I don’t know wh…’
   Rath seized Schürmann by the collar of his grey overalls. ‘I know you pocketed the money before you dropped the wallet.’
   ‘My apologies, Inspector, a simple oversight. I thought I had put everything back.’
   ‘So you admit it.’
   ‘I don’t like to steal anymore, but sometimes the temptation is too great.’
   ‘When you’ve got such a lovely shop as well.’
   ‘It’s an itch. Sometimes you have to scratch.’
   ‘Perhaps you should have a doctor take a look.’ Rath let go of Ede’s collar and smiled. ‘Give me fifty marks and we’re even.’
   ‘You think it’s as easy as that?’ Ede smoothed down his overalls and cranked a lever on the prehistoric till. The drawer opened with a loud pling. ‘See for yourself, Inspector. Nothing but shrapnel. I’ve barely any change, so how am I supposed…?’
   ‘All I know is, I had to reimburse Herr Klefisch from my own wallet!’
   Arriving at the police station, Rath had served up a story for Detective Wiefelspütz that not even he quite understood, but the Berlin Police identification coupled with the name Rath, which still held sway in Krebsgasse, had convinced Herr Wiefelspütz to accept his version of events and return the fifty mark note to its rightful owner.
   Even so, he saw no reason to pay the sum out of his own pocket.‘Do you know why I did it?’ he asked the thieving watchmaker.
   ‘I’m all ears, Inspector.’
   ‘Because I’m a humanitarian, and I didn’t want to report you. But that doesn’t mean I can’t change my mind, then you can kiss goodbye to all this.’
   ‘Please, Inspector!’ Ede seemed genuinely afraid. ‘Do you know what the SA do with people like me? They lock us up, whether we’re guilty or not.’
   ‘Then you appreciate the gravity of the situation. Give me the cash and I’ll say you’re an honest, upstanding watchmaker who hasn’t been on the rob for years.’
   ‘You’d do that, Inspector?’
   ‘Provided you give me the money.’ Rath held out his hand and rubbed his thumb against his index finger. ‘Otherwise the SA might hear a different story.’
   ‘I don’t have it, Inspector. Honest. If people settled their bills on time… but times are hard.’
   Rath hadn’t seen Ede grovelling like this before, not even when he’d interrogated him a decade ago.
   ‘When can you have the money?’
   ‘A week, maybe two. Please, Inspector. You’ll get your money, just don’t report me!’
   ‘You’re joking, aren’t you? Two weeks. I’ll be back in Berlin by then.’
   ‘I’ll bring it to you. I’ll be there soon enough anyway.’
   ‘When?’
   ‘In April, for a trade fair.’
   ‘April? I’m warning you, Ede, there’ll be interest.’
   ‘Whatever you say, Inspector. Just don’t report me!’
   Despite his empty travel fund, Rath relented and pushed his card across the counter.
   Leaving the store he couldn’t help thinking about the new age, even if everything on Eigelstein looked the same. If someone like Ede, a small-time crook who’d seen it all before, could be so afraid of beingreported, then things really were starting to change.
   57
   The euphoria that washed over her after alighting from the tram on Kaiserallee soon gave way to a crushing sense of disillusion, which was still there days later.
   Yes, she had escaped Huckebein, but been forced to break with Fritze at the same time. She had often considered ditching him, but now, having finally succeeded, she missed him every moment he was gone. It wasn’t just because his absence made it harder to find a place to sleep. Never before had she felt so alone.
   She had seen him on one further occasion, at Görlitzer Bahnhof, but he didn’t recognise her in the new coat she had acquired the same day she’d given Huckebein the slip. Watching from behind a pillar it pained her to see him begging again. She felt something like longing, and would have liked nothing more than to run to him, poke him in the ribs and revel in his dopey face. But she couldn’t. There was a chance Huckebein had seen them together, and was using Fritze as bait.
   In the meantime she could manage on her own. She had learned that stealing was preferable to begging, and had stopped going to the Märchenbrunnen after the incident at Bahnhof Zoo. No one would show up there now anyway, it was more of a summer haunt. The thing was, she didn’t have a clue where the posse met in winter. If, that is, the posse still existed.
   She had made for Neukölln, which seemed like the safest place, being far removed from Dalldorf and its warders, and equally far from Bahnhof Zoo. By now she was familiar with the area’s bars, cafes and shelters, knew where you could scrounge and where you couldn’t, and at Karstadt on Hermannplatz had even managed to filch an enormous cured sausage, which she had been nibbling at for days. If it wasn’t so damn cold, you could almost call if a life.
   Nights she spent in an old, abandoned cinema. It wasn’t heated, but it did provide shelter from the wind and the rain, and in the old, dusty film organ she had found a cosy spot between the pipes where she felt safe. From here she could survey the whole theatre without being seen herself.
   The dive bar she had stopped by this morning was one of the few places she could wash, even if the basin was out in the yard and it was all she could do not to cry out when the cold water touched her skin. She washed her face and neck and hands, no more, and, face-reddened by the cold, returned to the warmth of the public bar. Blinking against the cigarette smoke, to her surprise she recognised a familiar face. A member of the Märchenbrunnen posse stood at the counter. She went over.
   ‘Felix? Remember me?’ The youth, perhaps eighteen or nineteen, was warming his hands on a cup of weak coffee. He looked at her uncertainly. ‘Hannah,’ she prompted. ‘From Bülowplatz. We used to meet at the Märchenbrunnen.’
   His eyes lit up.‘That’s right,’ he said, and smiled. ‘Little Hannah! What happened to you? All of a sudden you stopped coming by…’
   She knew she couldn’t say what had really happened, not even to someone like Felix. They stood in silence for a time. Felix had been quiet back then, too, Fanny and Kotze had done most of the talking. Kotze, whose real name was Josef Koczian, had been the group’s leader. ‘I’ve been in town for a week,’ she said. ‘No one showed at the Märchenbrunnen.’
   ‘Not in winter. Anyway, those days are gone.’
   ‘Where are Fanny and Kotze?’
   ‘Doing their best to get by.’
   ‘You don’t see each other?’
   He looked her up and down.‘Coffee? You look like you could use one.’
   It felt good to talk, even with someone as taciturn as Felix, and no one else would stand her a coffee. She scooped three spoonfuls of sugar into her cup. That way the weak sludge would taste of something, and she’d feel as if she had something in her stomach.
   ‘What are you up to?’ she asked. ‘You’re looking swish.’
   Felix had never been this well-dressed when she’d known him before. It wasn’t exactly an elegant suit – thick wool coat, corduroy trousers, peaked cap – but there wasn’t a patch in sight, or a frayed edge. He looked like a worker, albeit one who earned a decent wage.
   ‘You don’t look so bad yourself,’ he said.
   She didn’t know if he was talking about her, or her clothes, which, though stolen, were more or less all new, but she felt uncomfortable. She wasn’t used to compliments.
   ‘Got somewhere to stay?’ she asked.
   He nodded.‘You?’
   ‘Here and there, same as always.’
   Felix looked her up and down for a second time.‘Want to stay with me for a bit? I could use a woman’s touch.’
   ‘Do you have room?’
   ‘Can you cook?’
   ‘Of course,’ Hannah lied.
   She could hardly believe her luck. She had a roof over her head again. A friend with money. Perhaps even a future.
   58
   The sun was setting as Rath reached Berlin where, as in Cologne, the number of flags seemed to have increased. In Lichterfelde and Steglitz they hung from the building fronts as if they had always been there. As cities Red Berlin and Catholic Cologne might be poles apart, but both now stood under the banner of the swastika. Only a few weeks before it would have been unthinkable.
   The imperial black-white-and-red, along with the Nazi flag, represented the new Germany. According to the newspaper Rath had purchased at a petrol station the black-red-and-gold of the Republic was, as of now, forbidden. Hindenburg had given his blessing to the whole thing.
   Thanks to Ede he had been obliged to pay by cheque. The attendant was suspicious at first, though the police badge set him at his ease. Even so, he insisted on making a note of Rath’s address.
   He had little to show for his three-day trip, and neither he nor Gennat was happy about it. He had spoken with Buddha first from his parents’ house, then again from a telephone booth after returning to Magdeburg in search of Hermann Wibeau. Neither was sure what the man’s continued absence could mean. Wibeau’s neighbours, at least, were unconcerned, and no unidentified corpses had turned up in Magdeburg in the last few days. Thishad reassured Buddha, who had put out a warrant for the man all the same.
   By the time Rath parked in Carmerstrasse it was already dark. He was surprised that Kirie should greet him alone, but then he heard music from the living room and went through to find Charly hunched over case files. On the table in front of her was a bottle of wine and a glass. Duke Ellington was spinning on the turntable. She looked up in surprise.‘Back already?’
   ‘I’ve been away for three days.’
   ‘I completely lost track of time.’
   She stood up, a little wobbly on her feet. He set down his case and took her in his arms. She snuggled up, and he was surprised by her affection. Had she really missed him that much – or was it just the alcohol? She tasted of red wine. ‘Welcome back,’ she said, and for the first time since renting the apartment almost a year ago, it felt like coming home.
   ‘What have you got there?’ he asked.
   ‘Hannah Singer. A new lead. She’s been sighted in town.’
   He took off his hat and coat.‘It’s landed with G Division?’
   She shook her head.‘I took the file from your office. Warrants put it on your desk, and I thought you might like to read it at home.’
   ‘What am I supposed to do with it? Hannah Singer is an escaped lunatic. She has nothing to do with my case.’ He was annoyed. Why couldn’t Warrants just pick her up and have her sent back to Dalldorf instead of clogging up his desk?
   ‘I can look into it if you like,’ Charly fetched a second glass from the cupboard. ‘Fancy a drop? I know it’s a little early, but I had to open a bottle.’
   They clinked glasses.‘Hard day?’ Rath asked.
   She looked at him so seriously he’d have liked nothing more than to kiss her again. ‘Gereon, I can’t take it anymore. Wieking, Karin, the whole goddamn WKP! The way they run after this Hitler as if he were the Saviour.’
   ‘That bad, huh?’
   ‘Worse.’ She reached for her cigarettes. ‘Can’t you put in a request for me?’
   ‘If only it were that simple. You mustn’t think there are no Nazis in Homicide. The commissioner is a Nazi, the whole damn country is governed by Nazis. That’s how it is, but it won’t last forever.’
   ‘Though apparently I’m fine to workunofficially, and spend my evenings grappling with gigolos.’
   ‘I’m sorry about that. I thought…’
   ‘It’s fine. Actually I enjoyed it.’ She looked at him with that gaze she knew he couldn’t resist. ‘I realise Gennat isn’t going to let us strike out together, Gereon, but he could always pair me up with Reinhold Gräf, like Böhm used to.’
   ‘Gräf’s no longer on my team.’
   ‘What? Why not?’
   ‘I didn’t ask him to be.’
   ‘But he knows the case. He was there at the start.’
   ‘He’s still working for the Politicals. Besides, he’s…’ He broke off. He didn’t know how to tell her.
   ‘He’s what?’
   ‘I…’ he hesitated again. ‘The thing is: Gräf’s a Nazi.’
   ‘Reinhold?’
   ‘I didn’t want to say anything, but as far as the national revolution’s concerned he’s really got the bit between his teeth. He’s friends with an SA officer too.’
   ‘That doesn’t mean anything. Reinhold’s a nice guy, I can’t picture him as a Nazi.’
   ‘He isn’t one of the malicious ones, but he’s just as gushing about Hitler as all these women. Like your colleagues in G, as if Hitler’s the Saviour. That’s what Reinhold believes too.’
   The record ended. Rath returned the tone arm to its starting position and went over to Charly, pulled her out of the armchair and danced slowly with her across the room.‘Now,’ he said, ‘I want to see what you learned from those gigolos.’
   ‘I hardly had a chance to dance,’ she said, nestling close.
   She told him the rest over dinner. Potato soup, the best thing she’d cooked for him yet. He lavished praise on the food.
   Her information confirmed him in his suspicions against Achim von Roddeck. A calculating sort who had been kept by various women, but had lost his meal ticket and possibly had money troubles of his own. All were avenues he ought to pursue. He told Charly about his visit to the demolition expert, Grimberg, and the man’s low opinion of his former lieutenant, before moving on to the widow Engel, whose description of her husband had been far removed from Roddeck’s lamentable novel.
   ‘It’s an insult to authors everywhere,’ Charly said. He looked at her in astonishment. ‘I had a glance at theKreuzzeitung.’ She shrugged, as if to apologise for being more interested in his case than her own.
   ‘Then you’re up to speed.’ Rath had to grin. ‘No need to ask Gennat or Wieking for reinforcements.’
   ‘I certainly have some thoughts I’d be willing to share.’
   ‘I’m listening.’
   ‘You want me to be honest?’
   ‘Of course.’
   ‘It wouldn’t surprise me if Achim von Roddeck is behind the murders himself.’
   ‘I don’t like him much either, but I wouldn’t go as far as that.’
   ‘He’s the only one who’s benefited. Without these murders, his so-called novel would never have got this much attention. Nor would he. I have the feeling he enjoys playing the role of endangered author.’
   ‘Still, that’s no reason to kill.’
   ‘Perhaps there’s another motive, but I certainly wouldn’t put murder past him. The war would have taught him how to kill.’
   ‘His own orderly though? Wosniak was devoted to his lieutenant. The pair were inseparable. At least, that’s how Grimberg tells it, and he’s hardly Roddeck’s greatest fan.’
   ‘Take a look at theKreuzzeitung and you’ll see what I mean. The papers are in your briefcase, along with the files from your office.’
   While Charly cleared the table he retired to the living room and topped up his glass. TheKreuzzeitung had certainly pulled out all the stops for the start of their serial. The first lines of Roddeck’s novel were flanked by an up-to-date report on the endangered author and his life under police protection. Rath suspected that people would buy the paper mainly to see if Roddeck were still alive, or whether he, too, had fallen victim to the mystery killer. He examined theKreuzzeitung’s photo of the author-come-gigolo-lieutenant. Achim von Roddeck gazed resolutely into the camera, flanked by two uniformed cops who escorted him to his car. It seemed almost as if he were a statesman of some kind, rather than an author whose work would most likely be forgotten in a year or two. It was a role he enjoyed; the photo left no room for doubt.
   Charly was right. There was no question the deaths of Wosniak and Meifert had brought the lieutenant and his novel to the public’s attention. However stuffy his prose might be, a sizeable payout was sure to follow.
   The next instalment made it sound as if the outcome of the war remained open and Germany still had a chance of victory.
   Tomorrow: Fateful Slaughter on the Somme
   As far as Rath recalled, the events of summer 1916 hadn’t proved decisive. Meanwhile the details of the episode which theKreuzzeitung sought to lay bare hadn’t occurred until March 1917. He wondered how many more instalments would be published before then.
   When Charly emerged from the kitchen she was holding a second bottle in her hand.‘I knew you’d finish it. Do you want to open another?’
   He grinned and reached for the corkscrew.‘As long as it doesn’t become a habit. We both have to work in the morning.’
   ‘Then perhaps we should…’ she took the bottle from his hand. ‘…get ourselves to bed.’ With that, she vanished into the bedroom with the wine and her glass. She didn’t look in the slightest bit tired. Rath examined his almost empty glass and took a last gulp. He picked it up and followed her inside. Kirie was shown the door.
   59
   An Inspector Stresow from 1A was responsible for coordinating Achim von Roddeck’s security arrangements. ‘It’s Hotel Central today, Friedrichstrasse. Ask for Herr Rubens at reception.’
   ‘Rubens?’ Rath asked.
   ‘We use different names each day.’
   ‘Let me guess: yesterday it was Dürer?’
   ‘Come again?’
   ‘It doesn’t matter. I see you’ve got it all worked out.’
   ‘Can’t make things easy for his would-be assassin.’
   When Rath emerged from the lift in Hotel Central, a handful of journalists were grouped outside the mysterious Herr Rubens’s suite. He lit a cigarette and joined them.
   His day had begun in the small conference room. These days, A Division resembled the waiting room of a provincial train station but, with so many CID officers recalled from the Political Police, things were starting to pick up again. Rath noted Gräf’s continued absence with relief.
   It was clear that a number of colleagues already took Hermann Wibeau for dead. There was nothing new from Warrants, but unless they picked him up on his doorstep he was unlikely to fall into their hands. Rath had instructed Henning and Czerwinski to conduct a parallel search, ensuring they were occupied while he stopped by Hotel Central.
   ‘You’re all here to see Herr Rubens?’ he asked the journalists.
   Some nodded, others didn’t react. ‘You’ll need to be patient,’ said a slight man with his press card in the band of his hat, American style. ‘I’m next.’
   Rath reached for his badge.‘Police ID trumps press. Sorry, but rules are rules.’
   The man didn’t contradict him. Respect for police officers had risen in recent weeks.
   The interviews were coordinated by Roddeck’s publisher, Dr Hildebrandt, who took leave of an outgoing journalist with a cordial shake of the hand. ‘Next, please,’ he said, as if he were a doctor’s receptionist. On seeing Rath, his eyes grew wide, and Achim von Roddeck was equally astonished.
   The author sat with a cup of tea behind a table by the window. A little to the side a policeman sat in an armchair leafing through a newspaper. By his bored expression he must be reading theKreuzzeitung serial. Roddeck rose to his feet.‘Inspector! You’re moonlighting as a reporter now? Or are you here on duty?’
   The wordinspector jolted the cop awake. He stood up and saluted.‘Nothing to report, Sir.’
   ‘Thank you,’ Rath said. He looked at Roddeck. ‘It’s you I came to see.’
   ‘I thought CID were no longer interested.’
   ‘Uniform are certainly making up for it.’ Rath looked out onto Friedrichstrasse and two cops outside the hotel entrance. Another stood in the lobby by the lifts, and a fourth was stationed here in Roddeck’s suite. Commissioner Levetzow had spared neither effort nor expense.
   Roddeck fixed his eyes on Rath.‘Poor Meifert might still be alive if you’d afforded him the same protection, but you didn’t heed my warning.’
   ‘On the contrary,’ Rath lied. ‘Circumstances prevented it. The acute Communist threat… Limited resources…’
   ‘I don’t want to argue,’ Roddeck said. ‘It’s just, you so feel helpless when a comrade has to die – despite being aware of the risks.’
   ‘Like in war?’
   ‘What do you want, Inspector?’
   ‘To talk to you.’
   Roddeck led him to the table.‘Can I offer you something? Send for room service?’
   Rath took his cigarette case from his pocket.‘Do you mind?’
   ‘Not at all.’
   ‘Nice work if you can get it. Staying in places like this.’
   ‘Not when you’re always on the move. Your colleagues say it’s safer. That it makes it harder for him to track me down.’
   ‘Him?’
   ‘Engel, who else? As long as we keep changing hotels, no one knows where I am.’
   ‘Apart from the police.’
   ‘Of course.’
   ‘And the press. They have to know how to find you too.’
   ‘What are you driving at, Inspector?’
   ‘The fact that there’s a new story about you practically every day. This endangered author, who, in spite of the threats being made on his life, stands by his explosive revelations.’
   ‘Jealous? You’d rather the focus was on you?’
   ‘I’m just wondering how safe allthis is.’ Rath gestured towards the door with his chin. ‘Who can guarantee that your would-be assassin isn’t waiting outside?’
   ‘First, if Benjamin Engel came through that door I’d recognise him, and I’m ready.’ Roddeck lifted his jacket to reveal the leather of a shoulder holster. ‘Second, my publisher is present for every interview, along with a police officer. Right now, there are two of you.’
   ‘It seems things are going well with your novel…’
   ‘Demand has increased dramatically since the start of the serial,’ the publisher, Hildebrandt, said, visibly proud. ‘We’ve had to reprint already.’
   ‘Sounds good.’
   ‘And we’ve brought forward the publication date.’
   ‘Aren’t you afraid you might provoke the killer?’
   Roddeck sat up.‘Like I’ve said before, Inspector, our decision-making won’t be swayed by these threats.’
   ‘I spoke with the widow Engel,’ Rath said, and Roddeck appeared surprised.
   ‘And?’
   ‘She can’t imagine her husband is still alive. Even less that he’s a killer.’
   ‘She can’timagine! You’d give weight to theimagination of a sentimental widow who has never seen her husband at war?’
   ‘I’m not giving weight to anything. I’m just wondering how Benjamin Engel could have survived this blast of yours.’
   ‘Believe me, I’ve asked myself the same thing often enough.’
   ‘Could there be someone else trying to prevent your novel from being published?’
   ‘The only explanation I have is that Benjamin Engel is still alive.’
   ‘An explosion like that… he’d have been torn to shreds.’
   ‘That’s what we thought too, but British artillery fire meant we couldn’t confirm it. Besides, we were already in retreat. We had to keep moving.’
   ‘Where were you when the explosion occurred?’
   ‘This is all in the book,’ Hildebrandt interrupted. ‘What’s the use in giving you a proof copy if you don’t even read it?’
   Rath glared at the man and he fell silent.
   ‘Like it says in the book, we were already in retreat,’ Roddeck said. ‘Perhaps three or four kilometres behind the front.’
   ‘Did you witness the explosion yourself, or is your account based on hearsay? The book uses the term “we” rather vaguely.’
   ‘I witnessed it, and I heard it. There was an enormous bang. We were all startled, thinking the British were advancing. Then came the news that Captain Engel had set off a boobytrap while inspecting our abandoned trenches.’
   ‘How can a trap like that be set off prematurely?’
   ‘You’d have to ask the man who built it.’
   ‘As a matter of fact, I have.’
   Again, Roddeck looked surprised.‘You’ve been rather more diligent than I anticipated, Inspector.’
   ‘Never underestimate the Prussian Police.’
   ‘I don’t know what Grimberg told you, but I suspected a British grenade landed in the trench at the wrong moment, and triggered the explosion.’
   ‘It happened by chance.’
   ‘You wouldn’t believe how often life and death are governed by chance, Inspector. Especially in war.’
   ‘Isn’t it possible that someone from your unit knowingly detonated the charge? Someone who wanted rid of Captain Engel?’
   ‘What gives you that idea?’
   ‘It can happen in war. Hated superiors who fall victim to their men.’
   ‘Not in the German army.’
   ‘How can you be sure?’
   ‘What are you trying to insinuate?’
   ‘I’m not trying to insinuate anything. I’m just asking questions.’
   Roddeck was on the verge of losing his composure.‘Don’t sully the army’s honour in the presence of a Prussian officer or I could be forced to take unpleasant action!’
   ‘Surely you’re not going to challenge me to a duel? I thought those days were gone.’ Rath shook his head. ‘Besides, the last thing I want to do is sully your honour, or that of the German army.’
   ‘Then what is this? You’re speaking with a potentialvictim here, not a killer.’
   ‘Who knows?’
   ‘What did you say?’ Roddeck turned bright red, and Rath was grateful to Charly for the idea.
   ‘So far you’re the one who’s benefited from these deaths. Who’s to say you aren’t responsible for them?’
   ‘Fanciful! It’s like saying the SA set fire to the Reichstag in order to strike at the Red mob.’
   ‘Then such thoughts aren’t completely alien to you. I just want you to be aware of the various avenues we need to pursue.’
   ‘All these avenues, a man could get lost. I can’t imagine your commissioner will welcome the digression.’ Achim von Roddeck rose from his chair and stood ramrod straight, every inch the humourless Prussian. ‘I must ask you to leave,’ he said. ‘The gentlemen from the press mustn’t be kept waiting any longer.’
   Rath stubbed out his cigarette, and stood up. His attempts to provoke the self-satisfied lieutenant had been an unqualified success.
   ‘This,’ he said, placing a Berlin Police envelope on the table, ‘is a summons. I would ask that you appear at police headquarters in good time on Friday, so that we can turn today’schat into something a little more formal.’
   60
   Using her police identification would only prompt more questions down the line, and as for the name Weinert… no one would link it back to her. Charly posed as a journalist again.
   She asked herself why she was flouting the rule book to investigate on Gereon’s behalf, indulging in the very high-handedness she always reproached him for, but thinking of Karin van Almsick, whom she had left moments before on the flimsiest of pretexts, she remembered that it was to avoid the deadly monotony of her job and feel like a police officer again.
   Marlene de Graaf was resident at the Hotel Belvedere in Tiergarten, where she had made the acquaintance of Achim von Roddeck’s successor, Handsome Sigismund. Sitting opposite her, it was clear how she had acquired the name ‘Countess’: her whole bearing was aristocratic. Judging by her eyes she must be about forty, but seemed younger. Above all she looked like someone who knew what she wanted and how to go about getting it. Charly couldn’t help but admire her.
   ‘Achim von Roddeck…’ the Countess said, smoking through a gold-plated cigarette holder. ‘What’s so interesting about him?’
   ‘Well…’ Charly pulled out her reporter’s pad. ‘…he’s enjoying great success with his debut novel, and our paper would like to shed some light on the man behind the author.’
   ‘Which paper?’
   ‘Der Tag.’
   ‘You want me to help?’
   ‘I hear you were once… intimately acquainted.’
   ‘That’s not something I’d care to read in the paper. As for my name… I hope you understand what I’m saying, or perhaps I should get in touch with my lawyer?
   ‘Don’t worry, nothing we discuss will appear in any paper. This is just for background information. I want to get a picture of Achim von Roddeck the man.’
   ‘Theman?’ Marlene gave a bitter laugh.
   Before Charly could probe any further a key turned and a door creaked open. The noises came from the vestibule, as did a high-pitched voice.‘Darling, I’m home!’ A blond youth poked his head through the door and smiled. Handsome Sigismund was at least twenty years younger than the Countess. Seeing Charly, he interrupted himself. ‘You have a visitor…’
   ‘This lady is a journalist.’
   ‘I just wanted to drop off the shopping,’ he said. ‘I’ll be in the lobby if you need me.’ He pulled the door shut.
   ‘Now it’s just us again…’ Charly said. ‘I get the feeling you’re not on especially good terms with Achim von Roddeck.’
   ‘You’re not wrong.’
   ‘Others describe him as being thoroughly charming.’
   ‘Only when he wants something. Underneath, he’s a depraved character. Don’t be taken in by the glamour and charm.’
   ‘As you were for two years.’
   ‘I’m not complaining. I was happy until I realised.’
   ‘You’re single?’
   ‘I don’t see what that has to do with your story.’
   ‘I’m just curious. Occupational hazard.’
   ‘Oh, where’s the harm? I’ve been a widow since October ’18. The war, just before it ended, saw fit to take my husband.’ She sounded as if she had made peace with her fate. ‘I swore that I would never remarry. I never wanted to feel such pain again and, thanks to my inheritance, there was no need. As for the rest…’ she gestured towards the door. ‘…there are other ways.’
   ‘Such as Achim von Roddeck. Did you love him?’
   ‘Probably, or at least I convinced myself that I did. Which amounts to the same thing. I was beyond disappointed when I found out he was using me.’
   ‘Don’t you always run the risk of being used when you buy men?’
   ‘As long as my plaything behaves like a plaything, and doesn’t pretend to love me, then both parties know where they stand and no one feels used.’
   ‘But with Achim von Roddeck you no longer knew…’
   ‘He claimed he loved me, even spoke of marriage. Until at some point I started dreaming of marriage again myself. Against my better judgement.’
   ‘But you were hurt again…’
   Marlene de Graaf nodded.‘It was a letter. I’m ashamed to tell you, usually I respect people’s private correspondence, and their privacy in general.’
   ‘What kind of letter?’
   ‘It was the letterhead… A communiqué from Krefeld District Court. What can I say? The letter contained details about his past.’
   ‘He’s from Krefeld?’
   ‘He certainly lived there for a few years. It seems Achim von Roddeck made a different woman exactly the same promises he was making me. Promises of marriage, which he never kept as it transpired three years and forty-five thousand marks down the line… The wretch!’
   ‘He’s a convicted marriage swindler? With a police record?’
   ‘He was never sentenced. The silly goose withdrew her statement when she came face-to-face with him in court. Proceedings were discontinued.’
   ‘But you had reached your own verdict?’
   ‘The letter might have confirmed his innocence, but my mind was made up.’
   ‘You took him to task…’
   ‘I threw him out. I didn’t want to see him, for him to bring me round. Seduce me, even. As you say, he can be incredibly charming.’
   61
   The court files arrived from Krefeld on Friday morning, leaving Rath just enough time to glance through them before meeting Roddeck. What Charly had uncovered was true: proceedings had been discontinued when Roddeck’s accuser refused to testify. It was hardly convincing. In the absence of an acquittal, the lieutenant’s reputation was tarnished by implication. A man like Roddeck would struggle to live with such a stain. Was that why he had moved to Berlin, where no one would give a damn? But… what if hispasthad caught up with him, and someone had tried to blackmail him? How would that fit with the murders?
   He had spent almost all of Thursday reading Roddeck’s novel for a second time, comparing its account with the statement made by the demolition expert, Grimberg. The lieutenant left the reader in no doubt that Captain Engel had died at the hands of his own boobytrap, just as he was now equally convinced Engel had survived. Though the events of March 1917 formed the novel’s central episode, the account limped on through another year and a half of conflict.
   The story did have a moral, if you could call it that, and Roddeck wasn’t shy in hammering it home: Jewish officers, whether baptised or not, have no place in the German army. Unbaptised Jews were precluded from joining the Prussian officer corps anyway, while Prussian Jews were obliged to enlist with the Bavarian army, as Bernhard Weiss had done.
   Achim von Roddeck arrived at the Castle without a lawyer, but in the best of spirits, cracking a joke that made even Christel Temme laugh. Rath wondered how this man, whom he had disliked from the start, could have such an effect on women. Perhaps he should ask Charly.
   ‘Let’s get started, Inspector,’ Roddeck said. ‘Otherwise your charming stenographer will be bored to tears.’
   Rath made a start.
   ‘Can you account for your whereabouts on the twenty-first and twenty-second of February?’
   ‘You’re not seriously asking for my alibi, Inspector?’
   ‘It’s purely routine.’
   Roddeck fetched a little black book from the inside pocket of his jacket.‘Lucky I keep a diary,’ he said. ‘The twenty-first and twenty-second… So, there’s nothing on the Tuesday. On Wednesday, I had a meeting with my publisher at three o’clock.’
   ‘Afterwards?’
   ‘I think we had dinner. I’d have to ask Hildebrandt.’
   ‘It would be good to know what you were doing on the Tuesday. Were you alone?’
   ‘I don’t think so, but it was a few weeks ago and I’d have to think about it.’
   ‘Please do, and give me the names of the people you were with.’ Rath made a tick in his notebook. ‘How about the ninth of March? Where were you in the early afternoon?’
   Roddeck leafed through his diary again.‘Kreuzzeitung at eleven, otherwise nothing.’ He snapped the diary shut. ‘I had lunch with the editor, Frank, and was home around one.’
   ‘Alone?’
   ‘For the most part, yes.’
   ‘It’s hardly water-tight.’
   ‘If Iwas your killer, I’d certainly have an alibi!’
   ‘Benjamin Engel: when did you come to the view that he survived the war?’
   ‘When I realised that poison-pen letter was no joke.’
   ‘It’s unsigned. It could be from anyone.’
   ‘Thereis no one else! God knows, I’ve racked my brains but, believe me, Inspector, there’s no other explanation.’ Achim von Roddeck was on the verge of losing his self-control. Perhaps Christel Temme wouldn’t be bored after all.
   ‘Let’s change tack.’ Rath took the Krefeld court file from its folder. ‘Perhaps you could tell me what you were doing on the seventeenth of February 1927?’
   ‘That was ages ago.’
   ‘Allow me to jog your memory. The main hall of the Krefeld District Court. You were sitting in the dock accused of being a marriage swindler, when…’
   Roddeck jumped up, his face red.‘How dare you? What does this have to do with anything? Do you wish to slander me?’
   ‘Had you allowed me to finish, I’d have said that shortly before the public prosecutor gave his final statement, the chief prosecution witness, one Eleonore Weber, retracted all her accusations.’
   Roddeck glared at him angrily. Christel Temme had ceased making doe-eyes, and was fully focused on her stenographer’s pad and pencil.
   ‘Tell me what you know!’ Roddeck demanded.
   The pencil scratched across the page. Fräulein Temme was taking everything down.
   ‘Just what’s in here,’ Rath said, tapping the court file.
   ‘I have a clean record.’
   ‘No one’s suggesting otherwise.’
   Rath was about to confront Roddeck with the issue of the missing gold, when the telephone rang. Roddeck was obviously grateful for the interruption. He sat down, suddenly charming again, but there was no way back with Christel Temme.‘Aren’t you going to answer that?’ he asked.
   Rath picked up. It was Gennat.‘I’m in the middle of an important interrogation, Sir.’
   ‘This is more important. We’ve found another corpse. In Magdeburg. Hermann Wibeau.’
   ‘Warrants were supposed to be watching his flat.’
   ‘They were.’ Gennat cleared his throat. ‘His body was found on the train.’
   62
   A passenger in second class had failed to alight when the Hannover-Magdeburg express pulled into the depot for cleaning. Still at his window-seat, head to one side, paper in his lap, the man couldn’t be roused. His sample case held company identification belonging to the Deisler firm, and when police officers saw the name Wibeau the penny dropped. Gennat had been informed immediately, and less than two hours later Gereon Rath was on his way with Alfons Henning as back-up, the latter torn away from his partner Czerwinski.
   An official led them to a siding at the far end of the station. Gennat had told the Magdeburg Police to leave everything as it was, so that Berlin could form its own impressions.
   Hermann Wibeau wore a grey suit, his eyes were closed and he looked as if he were sleeping. Only the blood, which had trickled down his mouth and chin and seeped into the padded seat, suggested violence. In the luggage rack were two suitcases. One held mostly dirty washing and used socks, extra shirts and a sponge bag, the other was full to the brim with clean, pristine-white ladies’ underwear. At least now they knew how Hermann Wibeau made his living.
   All the duty staff, from drinks attendant to driver, had been gathered together in a third class car to await dismissal. Most hadn’t noticed anything suspicious.
   ‘The gentleman had company most of the way,’ the conductor said. ‘I can’t fathom how anyone…’ He broke off, as if he couldn’t bring himself to say what it was he couldn’t fathom. That someone had driven a long, sharp object up the passenger’s nose and into his brain, a simple, efficient kill.
   ‘How often do you check the compartment during the journey?’
   ‘After each station. For new passengers.’ The conductor listed the stations on the fingers of his hand: ‘Lehrte, Peine, Braunschweig, Königslutter, Helmstedt…’
   ‘No need to be so precise,’ Rath interrupted. ‘When was the last time you saw the deceased alive?’
   ‘When I checked after Eilsleben.’
   ‘Who was with him?’
   ‘By that stage he was alone.’
   ‘You’re certain he wasn’t already dead?’
   ‘He looked up from his paper and smiled.’
   ‘Then his killer must have got off here in Magdeburg.’
   ‘There was no one left in the man’s compartment.’
   ‘You’re certain?’
   ‘I’ve a good memory for faces. You have to in our line of work.’
   ‘Then did you notice anything suspicious here, at the train station?’ Rath looked around, so that staff could see he was addressing everyone, not just the conductor.
   ‘What kind of thing are we talking about?’ the chief of staff asked.
   ‘Perhaps someone was in a rush, or elbowed other passengers to get off the train. Something like that.’
   All fell silent and made helpless faces. Rath fetched the photograph of Benjamin Engel from his pocket.
   ‘What about this man? Could he have been on board?’ The picture elicited a few shrugs and shakes of the head. ‘The man looks different these days, of course. This photograph was taken almost twenty years ago, his hair will most likely be grey, and it isn’t known what injuries he sustained in the war. Only that they were serious.’
   ‘He was in the war, you say?’ The conductor, who had just passed the photograph on, hesitated. ‘I had a disabled veteran in car fifteen. Boarded at Braunschweig.’
   ‘Could it be the man from the photo?’
   The photo was passed back and the conductor examined it once more.‘Hard to say. At first glance, I’d say no, but he was pretty badly disfigured, with nasty facial scars and he dragged his leg. Well-dressed though.’
   ‘He wasn’t in military dress?’
   ‘No, a lounge suit. Simple and dark, wore a bowler hat.’
   ‘How do you know he was a veteran?’
   ‘I know a veteran when I see one.’
   ‘Where did this man get off the train?’
   ‘Here, in Magdeburg.’
   63
   Hermann Wibeau’s corpse consigned Rath to weekend duty for the third Saturday in a row. Despite this he decided to take Charly out. It wasn’t that she resented his overtime, in fact she envied his work, but he wanted to treat her all the same. And himself.
   The Gloria-Palast was showing the latest Hans Albers film,Heut’ kommt’s drauf an, a perfectly ordinary comedy set in a world with no Nazis, swastikas or politics of any kind. Just the ticket to persuade her that the world outside could still be normal, and to assure himself that, although the Nazis proclaimed a new age, little had really changed.
   Arriving home last night from Magdeburg, he had crawled into bed beside her and inhaled her scent. In the morning he told her what had happened, that her suspicions were unfounded now that Achim von Roddeck had an alibi.‘He was with me in the interrogation room.’
   ‘But in Magdeburg, it was the same perpetrator as before…’
   ‘It looks like it.’
   Confirmation came from Dr Schwartz a few hours later. The same weapon, the same method. Brief and painless, and the disabled veteran the conductor had seen might just be the killer. A former soldier putting his trench dagger to use once more. Had Benjamin Engel risen from the dead?
   Rath had sent a police sketch artist to Magdeburg, but the result was next to useless. All the conductor could see were the suspect’s many scars. It was possible, of course, that it was an accurate depiction of Benjamin Engel following his injury, but it might have been anyone else. The most striking thing was the nose, which thanks to the suspect’s pitted complexion had morphed into a kind of indeterminable clump in the middle of his face, almost a caricature.
   When Rath got home, tickets at the ready, Charly had on her green dance dress. So she did want to go out, to dance, to enjoy herself. After the trials of the last few weeks, she seemed to have recaptured some of her zest for life. He changed and they went on their way. The cinema was within easy walking distance and they strolled there without Kirie, whom they had left with the porter.
   The swastika flags were less visible in the darkness, and the city looked much as it always had. Rath offered Charly his arm and she slipped her own through, smiling. There, you see? Just like old times.
   Soon, with the spires of the Gedächtniskirche above them, they reached the cinema. The new Albers film was a big draw with the foyer full to bursting, but with his police identification casually placed on the counter Rath had acquired prime seats for the Saturday screening.
   With its marble foyer and thick, soft carpets, pastel-green and gold theatre walls and bulky, red easy chairs, the Gloria-Palast was one of the most magnificent cinemas in Berlin, a premiere cinema, in which pretty much every Ufa star had made a red carpet entrance. It was also one of the few that still permitted itself the luxury of an orchestra, even though the silent era was at an end. The orchestra opened every screening, making a visit to the Gloria feel more like a visit to the opera.
   ‘Dr Schwartz sends his regards,’ Rath said, as they queued for the cloakroom. ‘He’s heard we’re getting married.’
   ‘I thought the whole of Berlin knew.’
   ‘Anyway, there’s no doubt our killer has struck again. The weapon in Magdeburg was the same.’
   ‘Do you think it’s Roddeck’s Todesengel?’
   ‘It certainly seems likely it’s a soldier.’ He told her about the conductor and the police sketch.
   ‘A disabled veteran?’ Charly looked at him wide-eyed.
   ‘A man with facial scarring. Unable to walk properly. Not a beggar, but the conductor swears he’s an ex-soldier. He had two brothers in the war, one of whom was killed in action. Says he can see it in their eyes.’
   Charly wasn’t interested in the conductor. ‘Sounds like the man who raised the alarm at Bahnhof Zoo after seeing Hannah Singer. A well-dressed, disabled veteran with scars on his face and one leg dragging behind.’
   ‘I could show you a dozen who fit that description at Bahnhof Zoo alone.’
   ‘Fine,’ she said. ‘Show me.’
   ‘What?’
   She dragged him out of the queue and towards the exit.‘We’re heading there now, so you can show me all these men fitting that description. Facial scarring, bad leg, well dressed.’
   ‘We’ll miss the film!’
   ‘Show me!’
   ‘Okay, you’re right. But even if well-dressed veterans are rare, it could still be a coincidence.’
   ‘You know perfectly well it isn’t. It’s highly likely the man who recognised Hannah Singer and the man who murdered Hermann Wibeau on the Magdeburg train are one and the same.’
   ‘What if they are?’
   ‘Then he’s the link to Hannah Singer. Hannah didn’t just know Wosniak, she knew his killer too. That’s why she fled the asylum. Because he’s afterher as well.’
   Charly looked at him so triumphantly that he knew arguing was futile. He steered her gently to rejoin the back of the queue.
   64
   ‘My gorilla has a villa in the zoo…’ Charly sang, dipping the washing brush in the warm water. There wasn’t a lot to wash up; yesterday’s wine glasses, Gereon’s breakfast dishes. He had chosen not to wake her this morning.
   ‘…my gorilla is happy and never blue…’
   She couldn’t get the daft song from the film out of her head. The refreshingly silly comedy had put her in the mood to explore Berlin’s nightlife. The Nazis steered clear of the Ku’damm, which meant Charly could enjoy it all the more.
   It was good to have the morning to herself at home. They had gone a little overboard last night but it had been fun. At least, as far as she could remember.
   After the film their first port of call had been the Kakadu-Bar, just like two weeks ago when Gereon took her out for dinner and Göring did his best to spoil their appetite. In Kakadu you could forget that people like Göring existed. The few brownshirts who drank there were more worldly than their beer-swilling, march-obsessed comrades.
   She danced through the kitchen, holding the washing brush like a microphone, trying to whip up her audience of one dog, but Kirie wasn’t interested. She tilted her head to one side and looked up with pity. Charly couldn’t help but laugh. She had no idea why she was in such a good mood, but why not just run with it?
   The doorbell rang, too early for Gereon unless he had followed her lead and feigned a stomach ache. Unlikely, since in the meantime he’d really got his teeth into his case. Three dead bodies was decidedly too many, but what really rankled was that the killer could lead them on such a merry dance – and that Achim von Roddeck was innocent.
   She looked through the peephole to see two police officers in blue coats, one wearing a shako, the other a brown SA peaked cap. On opening the door she noticed the little red-haired boy standing between them, grinning up at her in embarrassment.
   ‘Hello, Aunt Charlotte,’ he said. ‘Excuse the interruption.’
   The cop administered a clip to the back of his neck.‘Speak when you’re spoken to,’ he said, turning to Charly. ‘We picked him up at Friedrichstrasse station, begging from passers-by. He gave us this address and claimed you were his aunt.’
   Charly looked down at the boy, who stared pleadingly back. His mouth was smiling, but his eyes were full of trepidation. Before she could say anything, Kirie emerged from the kitchen and pitter-pattered towards the door for a closer look.
   ‘Hello, Fido,’ the boy said, ruffling her fur and floppy ears. Kirie wagged her tail and licked his face.
   The cop looked as if he were about to strike the boy again, but cleared his throat instead.‘Apologies. We thought the little mite had bust out of care.’
   The boy was still busy with Kirie, but at the word‘care’ he looked at Charly even more pleadingly than before. She didn’t know his name, but he seemed to read her mind. ‘Fido!’ he said. ‘You remember your old friend, Erich, don’t you?’
   ‘Erich!’ she said sternly. ‘How could you do this to your parents? Begging from passers-by! You should be ashamed.’
   ‘But Auntie!’
   She grabbed hold of an earlobe and wrenched him away from Kirie.‘You deserve a good hiding!’
   ‘But I had no money for the train.’
   ‘Did you run away again?’ She pulled on the boy’s ear so that he stood on tiptoes with his head tilted to one side. ‘I’ll see to the little rascal. Thank you, Officer.’
   The cop looked satisfied, likewise the SA auxiliary officer.‘Don’t be too strict on the lad, and give him his fare. You can certainly afford it.’ He gestured towards the brass doorbell as if that explained everything. ‘Then he won’t have to beg from strangers. Bad enough with all these street urchins. If there’s one less out there…’
   ‘Will do,’ she said.
   ‘Sorry again for the disruption, ma’am. In future tell your sister to keep a closer eye on the little devil.’ He turned to the boy and wagged his finger. ‘Just make sure I don’t catch you begging again. Do we understand each other?’
   The boy nodded as best he could given he was still being held by the ear.
   ‘Else we’ll lock you up and your parents can come fetch you from jail. Or your aunt!’ He winked at Charly and gestured discreetly towards his companion. The two of them marched down the stairs.
   Only when the door clicked shut did Charly finally let the boy go. He rubbed his ear while Kirie sniffed at him and wagged her tail.
   ‘Good boy, Fido,’ the boy began, but Charly interrupted him.
   ‘Fido’s name is Kirie,’ she said, ‘and what are you doing here!’
   ‘Still had your address, didn’t I?
   ‘All these lies… it’s nothing to be proud of.’
   ‘They’d have sent me back into care.’
   ‘And what amI supposed to do? It’s not like you’re actually a baker’s apprentice.’
   ‘Just don’t send me back. I’ll jump out of the window.’ He looked serious.
   ‘Don’t say that.’
   ‘I know you’re a cop but I thought I could talk to you.’
   The boy’s instincts were good. Gereon always said she was too soft, especially when it came to the weak and vulnerable. ‘Don’t worry, I’m not going to send you back. Do you have somewhere to go?’
   ‘I’ll find something.’
   She led him into the kitchen and made him a cup of cocoa.‘Hungry?’ He nodded. She prepared a few sandwiches and fetched Hannah’s file from the living room. When she laid the photo on the table he stopped eating, staring reluctantly at the ED portrait of Hannah Singer.
   ‘This girl,’ Charly said. ‘The one I showed you before. I’m looking for her.’
   ‘Haven’t seen her, sorry. It’s a long time since I’ve been at Bahnhof Zoo.’
   ‘But you’ve seen her before? Her name is Hannah Singer.’
   ‘I don’t know her.’
   ‘Yes, you do! I save you from the cops, play along with the whole auntie charade, give you food and drink, and you won’t even tell me your name! You won’t tell me anything!’
   Kirie’s gaze flitted between them.
   ‘I just told you my name.’
   ‘So it’s Erwin, is it?’
   ‘If I say it is.’
   ‘Ten minutes ago, it was Erich.’
   He looked perplexed, then defiant.‘It’s none of your goddamn business.’
   ‘I think it is, and not because I want to send you back. I just want to know who I’m dealing with.’
   ‘Fritze,’ the boy said. ‘Friedrich.’
   ‘OK, Fritze. Believe me when I say that I want to protect Hannah. I’ve no intention of harming her. She’s in danger, and I have to find her.’
   ‘But I’m looking for her too.’ Fritze sounded almost desperate. ‘One day she was just gone. There was this man at Bahnhof Zoo who shouted:Stop that mad girl! or something, then he spoke with the cops.’
   ‘You saw him?’
   ‘From a distance. I wasn’t sure if he meant Hannah. Back then I didn’t know she’d bust out of Dalldorf. Was it a warder?’
   ‘I think it was the man who’s after her.’ She showed him the pre-war photo of Benjamin Engel. ‘Could it have been this man?’
   ‘It could have been anyone. His face looked as if it had been through a meat grinder.’
   ‘You didn’t notice anything else about him?’
   ‘He had a limp, and a bowler hat.’
   ‘You have to help me, Fritze. If you see this man anywhere, I want you to head straight for the nearest telephone booth and call me. And if you see Hannah, bring her to me.’
   ‘She won’t come.’
   ‘It’s more important you tell me where she is.’
   ‘If I knew that…’ He looked at her helplessly. ‘I’ve been at Bahnhof Zoo for days on end, but there’s no sign.’
   ‘I’ll make a suggestion. You can sleep on the sofa, warm up a little and take a bath. I’ll give you food, and in return you help me look for Hannah. How about it?’
   ‘What if I don’t find her? Will you stick me back in care?’
   ‘Never, I promise.’ The boy oozed suspicion. ‘How about it? We’ll go together and you can show me all the places you’ve been with Hannah. The dog needs walking anyway.’
   65
   Rath had seen it coming after the weekend’s headlines. Despite the official line that close cooperation with the press was to be avoided, the public image of the Berlin Police was not to be taken lightly and so, this Monday morning, in light of his continued failure to deliver the Jewish mass murderer dead or alive, despite express orders to the contrary, Magnus von Levetzow had summoned him, once more, to report.
   ‘Inspector Rath,’ the commissioner said icily, ‘how kind of you to join me. I wonder if I could trouble you for a little information.’
   ‘Very good, Sir.’
   ‘How many dead bodies,’ he said, voice growing louder with each word, ‘will it take before you find our killer?’
   ‘With respect, Sir, it isn’t that simple. My team doesn’t have the resources.’
   ‘Enough of your excuses!’ When he wanted to, Magnus von Levetzow could really shout, and beat his fist on the table. ‘Half of Warrants is out looking for Benjamin Engel. The sketch you had made has been sent to all police stations in Prussia, together with a profile of the suspect. Talk aboutresources!’
   ‘Why amI sitting here,’ Rath asked, ‘if Warrants are to blame?’
   ‘You are here because of your own failures, and because you have exploited the powers invested in you as a police officer in a manner I refuse to tolerate.’
   ‘I don’t know what you mean, Sir.’ Rath knew what Levetzow meant all right. Roddeck had squealed.
   ‘Do I really have to explain? You treated a Prussian lieutenant, a former soldier whose life is under threat from the very man you are supposed to be apprehending, as a suspect.’
   ‘Convention dictates that all persons connected to a fatality are required to present their alibi. Since we were dealing with a new victim I felt compelled to ask Lieutenant von Roddeck for his.’
   ‘Just so there are no misunderstandings, Inspector. There’s nothing I like more than my officers getting in touch with their inner Rottweiler, but make sure you snap at the right people! The ones who can tell you where Benjamin Engel is hiding.’
   ‘With respect, Sir, that’s precisely what I’m doing. I’ve already grilled his supposed widow, we’re still looking for his driver, and above all we have the sketch with the description of the Magdeburg…’
   ‘Then don’t stop! I want you to question anyone who’s had anything to do with Benjamin Engel’s life, starting with his childhood friends and Rabbi. The murdering Jew has to be somewhere, and someone knows where. They’re the ones you grill, not poor Roddeck, a decorated war veteran.’
   ‘Yes, Sir.’ Rath did his best to sound contrite. He’d had a lot of practice down the years, and not just with this commissioner. ‘As far as Wibeau’s concerned, there’s no need to ask Roddeck for his alibi. I was interrogating him at the time.’
   Levtzow shot him a glance.‘Speaking of interrogations: we’ve received a complaint about you from the SA Field Police. Apparently you let a dangerous career criminal and alleged Communist escape during an interrogation?’
   ‘The man is a witness in the Wosniak investigation. He didn’t escape, his lawyer had a prisoner release form.’
   Levetzow waved dismissively.‘You were played by a Jew shyster and the witness retracted his statement. Am I right?’ Rath nodded. ‘Meaning you lost your witness, and the SA their prisoner.’ Rath nodded. ‘Perhaps you should have treated this lawyer with the same obstinacy you reserved for poor Lieutenant von Roddeck!’ Rath nodded. ‘Then get to work, Inspector. Find this Engel!’
   ‘Yes, Sir.’ Rath stood up.
   ‘Report to me as soon as you pick up his trail. I want to be kept personally informed.’
   ‘Yes, Sir.’
   ‘Good, now get out of here.’ Magnus von Levetzow stretched out his right arm. ‘Heil Hitler!’
   The salute caught Rath off guard. Unsure how to react, he settled for clicking his heels and taking his leave with a brisk bow. In the corridor he felt like an idiot, but at least he hadn’t been cajoled into thrusting his right arm aloft.
   Back in his office he took Benjamin Engel’s biography from the file. As Levetzow had said: from his childhood friends to his Rabbi… To think, he didn’t even know if the man was alive.
   The official report from 1917, which had found its way to police headquarters, gave no clues either. The episode was described more or less exactly as in Roddeck’s novel, which was hardly surprising when you looked at the signature on the form. Back then, the lieutenant had questioned the witnesses himself. Alongside demolition expert Grimberg, the focus had been on Engel’s driver, Franz Thelen. In point of fact, they were the only witnesses, or at least the only ones present when the charge detonated.
   Absent from the report was the question, first raised by Grimberg, of whether Engel’s death might not have been an accident. The interrogation mostly consisted of the demolition expert exploring the various possibilities that might have led to the charge going off prematurely, including the stray pigeon he later mentioned to Rath. The statement made by Engel’s driver was morestraightforward: a British artillery grenade must have landed in the trench and set off the trap. Unfortunately Thelen, the only other witness to the explosion, seemed to have vanished into thin air. In 1917 he had been sent to the Eastern Front, and in 1919 had joined a volunteer corps fighting against the Red army in the Baltic States. Erika Voss had been unable to find a current address.
   A search for Engel’s corpse had never taken place, since the area in question had ceased to be part of German territory. If he had survived the blast, the advancing enemy, whether British or French, would surely have found him.
   Rath skimmed the biography. Benjamin Engel was born in Siegburg in December 1883 and educated in Bonn, where he also attended university. The only period he’d spent outside of the Rhineland was in Munich, where he had completed his studies before taking his commission in the Bavarian Army. He had married Eva Heinen, whom he’d obviously known for some time, immediately following his return from Munich in 1907, and entered his parents’ furniture business. The couple welcomed a son, Walther, in 1908, and a daughter, Edith, followed in 1913. No mention of Rabbis or childhood friends, but Rath noted the names of the groomsmen all the same. Perhaps one was a friend from school days. After that came the Catholic priest who had married them, probably the same man who had baptised Engel.
   Police colleagues in Bonn had been shadowing Eva Heinen since Rath’s visit to the Rhineland last week, but the only point of interest were her walks in the nearby Siebengebirge mountains, where her driver would drop her most mornings. Rath didn’t think the surveillance would lead them to Engel: by now it was clear the killer was based in Berlin or environs. It was here, rather than the Rhineland, that he had struck: Berlin, Potsdam, and on the train between Braunschweig and Magdeburg.
   There was a knock at the door.‘Yes,’ he said, reluctantly. He hated it when his secretary wasn’t there. He hated it even more when she wasn’t there,and he was interrupted. This particular interruption had a cute face, however, and lovely brown eyes.
   ‘Is this a bad time?’ Charly asked.
   ‘It’s fine. Come in.’
   She crossed the empty outer office.‘Sorry,’ she said. ‘I forgot Erika isn’t here today.’
   ‘No problem. Should I lock the door?’
   ‘Gereon, really!’
   ‘Are you surprised? We had company last night, which means we have to take advantage during the day.’
   ‘Don’t start that again.’
   Returning from work last night he had felt like a stranger in his own home. Charly intercepted him at the door and placed a finger to her lips, leading him on tiptoes into the living room where a boy lay under a woollen blanket on the sofa, at the end of which Kirie was curled into a little ball as if watching over him.
   ‘That’s Fritze,’ Charly whispered, before steering Rath into the kitchen and closing the door behind them. Eschewing a cognac in his favourite armchair, Rath made do with warmed Bouletten and a glass of water, after which Charly told him what the boy was doing there. Clearly she was in battlemode. Her gaze said the boy stays, or I go, and Rath was too tired to engage.
   At breakfast the boy made himself useful in whatever way he could. Charly even entrusted him with Kirie’s morning stroll. Rath secretly feared he’d sell her to the nearest passer-by, but he was back after a quarter of an hour. A warm place to sleep obviously meant more than a hasty mark or two. Charly had promised he could stay for a few days, mentioning this only once she and Rath had left for work. She had already introduced Fritze to the porter, saying he was her nephew from Zehdenick. That way he could come and go as he pleased. ‘He’s helping me find Hannah,’ she had explained.
   Rath swallowed his anger in the car, but could no longer hold his tongue. Charly was ready.‘There’s no way I’m sending him back on the streets. He stays with us until I think of something else.’
   ‘How about a children’s home?’
   ‘Why do you think he bust out in the first place? He says he’d rather die than go back, and I believe him.’
   ‘And that’s not the only thing.’
   ‘Gereon, let’s not fight here too.’
   ‘Who’s fighting? As a matter of fact I suggested the exact opposite.’
   ‘Lecher!’ She couldn’t help but smile.
   ‘Then what are you doing here?’
   ‘Duty call.’ She gestured towards his desk. ‘The documents from the Bülowplatz fire, can I have them?’
   ‘What do you want with them?’ Rath rummaged in his drawer. The file was somewhere near the bottom.
   ‘I’m looking for a fallen girl,’ she said. ‘It’s what G Division are for.’
   ‘If you’re seeking refuge… from Wieking or your colleague – you can always usemy office.’
   ‘I’m not sure your secretary would appreciate that.’
   ‘Erika’s off for the next two days, and I’ll see Plisch and Plum are kept busy.’
   ‘Then you’ll lock the door…’
   ‘Who knows?’
   Charly kissed him back, but withdrew when he tried to embrace her.
   ‘Not now, Gereon,’ she said, waving the file. ‘No time.’
   She turned at the door.‘Can you tell me where I’ll find Reinhold?’
   ‘He’s still out hunting Communists. Why?’
   ‘He was the one who dug up this fire business in the first place. Perhaps he knows something that isn’t in the file.’
   ‘Hannah Singer, Fritze Don’t-Ask-Me, Alex back in the day…’ Rath sighed. ‘Could it be that you have a weakness for street children?’
   ‘Every woman has her secrets,’ she said, waving the file as she disappeared.
   66
   The wind whistled across Bülowplatz as Charly stepped out of the U-Bahn. She turned up her collar and circled the Volksbühne until Karl Liebknechthaus came into view. It was the first time she had seen the building without banners and Communist mottos. The rows of windows looked dead and deserted, like the square itself, as if the former Communist party headquarters held some dark threat. The Liebknechthaus had attracted workers from across the city with its slogans and political rallies, but for the past two weeks a Nazi flag had flown from its roof and Communists were thin on the ground. Upstanding citizens had always given Bülowplatz a wide berth and, where once it was fear of Communists, now it was fear of being mistaken for one. Only the Volksbühne reminded Berliners it was one and the same square.
   Charly tried to locate the site where Heinz Singer and seven other beggars had been consumed by flames on New Year’s Eve 1931. The shacks of old were gone, with new buildings erected all around. The scene of Assistant Detective Stephan Jänicke’s murder four years ago was now a cinema. The Crow’s Nest, meanwhile, had been replaced by an apartment block, and there was nothing to suggest beggars had once lived here. So many pasts erased, Hannah’s too, and that of her father.
   Horst-Wessel-Haus it said above the Liebknechthaus portal, where two SA auxiliary officers stood guard. It wasn’t the only building the Nazis had renamed. A second new plaque hung resplendent by the entrance:Police Headquarters, Berlin, Department for the Prevention of Bolshevism.
   Charly showed the SA officers her identification and went inside, reluctant to treat the brownshirts as colleagues but with little choice. They had told her the room number at Alex. Reinhold Gräf looked up in surprise.
   ‘Charly,’ he said, pleased to see her. She struggled to believe what Gereon had told her. Just because someone worked for the Politicals and was friends with an SA officer, it didn’t make them a Nazi. ‘What brings you here?’
   ‘I wondered if you’d have lunch with me. I didn’t fancy eating at Alex.’
   ‘I’m afraid there’s no canteen here.’
   ‘Only nice new offices.’
   ‘Nicebig offices anyway. We need the space.’
   ‘Ah yes, the new age. 1A has more officers seconded to it than any other department.’
   ‘Yet our work continues,’ he said, deadly serious.
   ‘Is that why you don’t have a canteen?’
   Reinhold grinned and put the file he’d been reading into a drawer. ‘You might not believe it, but sometimes even the Political Police need a break. There’s a nice little restaurant around the corner.’ He reached for his hat and coat and held the door open.
   ‘Do you actually enjoy working for the Politicals?’ she asked, when they were out of earshot.
   ‘Define enjoy. Certain things you have to do.’
   ‘Snooping on people’s political beliefs?’
   ‘This isn’t a question of beliefs. People can think what they like, but the Communists want to establish a Soviet Germany by force. Having dragged our country to the brink of civil war with their rioting, they set the Reichstag on fire… don’t you think it’s time we put a stop to it?’
   ‘But your methods…’
   ‘Our methods, Charly. In the fight against the Reds every individual matters. Women’s CID are just as important as the Politicals and every other officer, including the auxiliary police.’
   ‘Who are free to use exactly the type of force we seek to prevent?’
   ‘History has shown there’s no other way. Besides:we are permitted to do so by the authority invested in us by the state.’
   Conversations with Reinhold used to be less complicated.
   He took her to a little restaurant beside the cinema. The prices were reasonable; perhaps some things never changed. Apart from a group of brownshirts occupying a table of six, the place was empty. The nearby presence of the SA and Political Police deterred normal paying customers. They found a seat away from the loudmouthed SA men.
   ‘I know what CID think of 1A,’ Reinhold said, ‘but, since joining the Politicals, for the first time in my career I feel like if I’m doing something useful. Not just in Berlin, but the country as a whole.’
   ‘You didn’t feel that way in Homicide?’
   ‘Where we investigate after the fact? Working for 1A I can actuallyprevent Communists and other enemies of the state from causing further damage.’
   Enemies of the state. Charly wondered whether the Nazis didn’t pose the greater danger. Before she could say the wrong thing, the waiter arrived. Reinhold recommended the chicken fricassee Berlin style, and Charly followed his lead.
   ‘Speaking of old times,’ she said. ‘You worked with Böhm on the Wosniak case, didn’t you? These homeless shelters…’
   He raised his eyebrows.‘We were looking for someone to identify the deceased. Preferably the other survivor of the Bülowplatz arson.’
   ‘Gerhard Krumbiegel?’
   ‘Right.’
   ‘Did you find him?’
   He shook his head.‘It doesn’t have to mean anything. There are all manner of homeless shelters in Berlin. My theory is that Krumbiegel skipped town after the fire, maybe went back to Saxony. That’s where he was from.’
   ‘Saxony?’
   ‘Not the Free State, the Prussian province. He was from Halle. I telephoned the Criminal Record Office there. A colleague was due to comb the files.’
   ‘And?’
   ‘Then this lieutenant showed up and identified Wosniak.’
   ‘Von Roddeck?’
   ‘Yes, I told Halle the matter was closed.’
   ‘Did they find anything?’
   ‘Krumbiegel hasn’t been registered in Halle since he left shortly after the war.’
   ‘He was homeless. Doesn’t have to mean anything.’
   ‘No. What’s all this about, Charly?’
   ‘I don’t know. I just sense he’s got some role to play in all this. He might even be our killer.’
   ‘You’re back in Homicide?’
   She felt caught out and had to laugh.‘No, but I think this girl who bust out of Dalldorf…’
   ‘The crazy arsonist…’
   ‘Hannah Singer. I think she could be a key factor.’
   ‘What does Gereon think? Does he know you’re interfering in his case?’
   ‘Define interfering.’ She placed a finger to her lips. ‘Don’t say anything to Wieking. I’m just helping him a little when my schedule allows.’
   ‘Charly, Charly!’ Reinhold shook his head. ‘You’re talking like Gereon Rath.’
   ‘Is that a compliment?’
   ‘I’d rather not say. Just don’t let the chiefs catch you!’
   ‘It isn’t their concern how I spend my lunch break, or my free time.’
   ‘Charly, it would be a shame if your career went down the tubes before it’s even begun. Don’t go the same way as Gereon. His method’s toast, especially now.’
   ‘The way you talk about him…’ She smiled. ‘I thought he was your friend.’
   ‘So did I.’ The sentence had slipped out, and Reinhold was talking again before she had the chance to respond. ‘What’s up with him anyway? It’s like he’s disappeared. I hope you haven’t banned him from going out already?’
   Charly sensed he wasn’t quite as relaxed as he made out. Clearly Gereon was playing hard to get, and Reinhold was wondering why. Had Gereon broken with his friend because he thought he was a Nazi? Without telling him… He was certainly capable of it. Besides, these days who told a Nazi to his face you didn’t sharehis beliefs?
   She realised conversation with her old friend was being suffocated by politics.‘You really think Gereon Rath would let himself be hen-pecked?
   ‘By someone as pretty as you, perhaps.’
   She met the compliment with a smile, which felt just as false as the rest of their conversation. Once upon a time she had feared Reinhold was in love with her, only to realise that he simply valued her as a colleague. Now she wondered if they were even that.
   67
   Rath found the boy in the kitchen. Washing up done, he was cleaning the sink. The water gurgled down the drain, drowning out all other noise. Fritze spun around as Kirie jogged his elbow.‘Jesus Christ!’
   ‘Morning, Fritze.’
   ‘Morning, Herr Rath.’ The boy pointed towards the sink. ‘Thought I’d do the washing up before I went looking for Hannah. It’s still only half past nine.’
   ‘Good,’ Rath said. ‘Perhaps you’ll have more luck today.’
   ‘Perhaps.’ After two blank days of searching it sounded as if Fritze had a guilty conscience.
   ‘I think it’s great you’re helping Fräulein Ritter,’ Rath said. He fetched his wallet from his jacket pocket and fished out a ten-mark note. ‘For you.’
   Fritze looked at the note as if he smelled a rat.
   ‘Take it, for your help.’
   ‘No need.’ The boy looked almost scared of the money. At length, he accepted. ‘Thank you.’
   ‘Let’s not beat about the bush. We both know you can’t sleep on the sofa indefinitely.’ Fritze folded the note over and over again. ‘You can look after yourself out there, can’t you? You don’t need us.’ The boy nodded mechanically, as if he were a wind-up toy. ‘I’m not going to say anything to Welfare, but I don’t want to see you here again.’
   ‘And Hannah? Aunt Char… Fräulein Ritter wants me to…’
   ‘If you find her, sure, let Charly know. She’ll be pleased.’ Rath put a finger to his lips. ‘Not a word about our talk, you understand? It stays between us men.’
   Fritze smiled uncertainly.‘If I find Hannah I’ll be in touch. Otherwise you won’t hear from me again.’ He ruffled Kirie’s fur and she wagged her tail. No doubt hoping for a stroll she pitter-pattered towards the front door. Rath followed, grabbing her by the collar in the nick of time.
   ‘So,’ he said, raising his hand. ‘Good luck!’
   ‘Thanks for everything.’ Fritze glanced at Kirie a final time before taking to the steps.
   Rath closed the door, feeling uneasy, but he couldn’t let the flat he shared with Charly be turned into a shelter for street children. Two nights with an unwanted guest in the room next door was quite enough. The boy was a real passion-killer.
   He sat in the living room and smoked a cigarette. March music blared from the radio; he switched it off. Ever since Gauleiter Goebbels assumed control of the Berliner Funkstunde as Minister for Public Enlightenment and Propaganda, the station’s output had grown ever more wretched.
   68
   Charly couldn’t bear it. Karin van Almsick’s radio had been on since ten o’clock. Friederike Wieking had stopped by, but said nothing, not on a day like today when even the schools were closed. Against a backdrop of march music the reporter spoke as if more were at stake than the inauguration of the new Reichstag. The ceremony had been summarily relocated to the Potsdam Garrison Church, and the one-time royal seat of Prussia turned on its head. Festival services, open-air concerts, goose-steps, the whole shebang.
   ‘Everywhere you look the spirit of Prussia abounds,’ the reporter was saying, after painstakingly listing the regiments that formed the guard of honour which, together with the SA and Stahlhelm, now awaited the meeting of Hindenburg with Hitler.
   ‘The Reich President, still to emerge from his car, the pleasure garden awash with military federations of the Fatherland. We await his arrival here in front of the guard of honour…’
   ‘Can you turn it down a little, I can’t concentrate,’ she groaned.
   ‘Don’t be like that.’ Karin’s right ear was practically nailed to the device. ‘Oh, what I’d give to be there.’
   ‘I’m sure your Rudi will tell you all about it.’
   Karin had ears for the radio only. His voice breaking with emotion, the reporter described how Hitler received Hindenburg, who had arrived at last, with a low bow and shake of the hand.
   ‘Just imagine, this is happening right now!’
   The pathos from the radio made Charly dizzy. She actually felt sick. It wasn’t that she lacked Prussian patriotism, but here it served merely to highlight the hypocrisy on show. The Nazis had already taken Berlin, and now they were taking her Prussia, too! ‘Excuse me,’ she said. ‘I have to stop by Registry.’
   Karin nodded, and Charly wedged the Bülowplatz file under her arm and left for where she could make a call in peace. There was no radio in his office. Instead she was greeted by the dog. Gereon looked surprised.
   Charly gestured towards Erika Voss’s abandoned desk. ‘You did promise me refuge if it came to the worst.’
   ‘Has something happened?’
   ‘The radio’s been on the whole day. Reichstag inauguration, in Potsdam. I’m sure you can imagine.’ She set the file on Erika Voss’s desk.
   ‘Doesn’t look like your standard G Division case.’
   ‘Mind if I help with yours?’
   ‘My orders are to find Benjamin Engel.’
   ‘Then someone has to investigate the leads you can’t.’
   ‘Make yourself at home,’ he said, ‘and if you need a break, there’s less chance of us being interrupted in my office.’
   ‘Gereon! I’m here to work.’
   ‘Just a suggestion.’
   She sat down and Gereon returned to his office. Kirie looked for a spot under her desk while she placed a trunk call to Halle.
   ‘Officer Petzold and colleagues are following events in Potsdam,’ a secretary informed her. ‘Please try again later.’
   Charly slammed the receiver onto the cradle with such force that Gereon came back out.‘That is the property of the Berlin Police,’ he said. ‘It’s Bakelite, not Krupp steel.’
   ‘Is anyone actually working today? The only thing people seem to care about is Hindenburg shaking this goddamn Hitler’s hand.’
   ‘It isn’t theonly thing,’ he said, pulling her chair away from the desk and into his office, where he shut the connecting door and turned the key in the lock. He leaned over her and kissed her, and, after a brief and half-hearted protest, she kissed him back.
   ‘You do this with your secretary too?’ she asked.
   ‘Only every third Tuesday.’
   ‘Cheeky bastard.’
   ‘Sorry,’ he said and kissed her on the nape of the neck. ‘But after the last two nights…’
   She sighed, but he was right. If no one else was working why the hell should she?
   ‘Close the curtains,’ she said, pointing to the window. Outside an S-Bahn rumbled past, no doubt bound for Potsdam.
   69
   The university library reading room was the size of a railway concourse, but much quieter.
   Walther Engel resembled his father in all but the captain’s uniform and Kaiser Wilhelm moustache. Rath had been looking over his shoulder but, when Engel turned around, put a finger to his lips. He laid his identification next to the books:German Quarterly for Literary Studies and Intellectual History; Psychoanalysis and Literary Studies; The Literary Generations; Identifying Characteristics of German Romanticism…
   Engel examined the identification.‘My mother said you might show up. Let’s go outside. I could use a break.’
   Rath agreed and stowed his ID. On Dorotheenstrasse they were greeted by a chill wind. They walked alongside one another, hands in pockets.‘Your mother mentioned my visit?’ he asked.
   ‘And your story about my father.’
   ‘What do you think?’
   ‘Can I imagine my father is still alive, or that he’s a spineless killer?’
   ‘You’re well briefed.’ Rath took his cigarette case from his coat and held it out. The two men strolled on, smoking as they went.
   ‘I’m glad I ran into you,’ Rath said. ‘It’s the semester break, isn’t it?’
   ‘You can study outside of lectures.’
   ‘But your… studies have little to do with the furniture business…’
   ‘BecauseI want nothing to do with it.’
   ‘Who will carry it into the fourth generation?’
   ‘My mother has taken care of all that. In times like these it falls to others to safeguard the store’s future.’
   ‘What do you mean?’
   ‘I’m half-Jewish, Inspector, even if I’ve never set foot in a synagogue. Though that’s also true of many who count as “full Jews” in the eyes of the anti-Semites.’
   ‘So?’
   ‘What kind of future do you suppose a Jewish furniture business has in the new Germany?’
   ‘Come off it! What use is anti-Semitism to the Nazis now they’re in power? Things aren’t nearly as bad as people make out.’
   ‘I wish I shared your confidence. My mother certainly doesn’t. Why do you think she reverted to her maiden name? My father could have been baptised a hundred times, but as far as Bonn society’s concerned we’ll always be Jew upstarts.’ He gazed at Rath critically. ‘What is it you want?’
   ‘Anything you can tell me about your father.’
   ‘Inspector, I don’t know if I can help you. I was twelve when my mother told me Father wouldn’t be coming home. She never used words likedead orkilled in action, but we knew, Edith and I. Like her we still hoped that one day he might return.’
   ‘And now?’
   ‘My father is dead. I can feel it.’
   Rath took the police sketch from his pocket.‘This man is almost certainly responsible for the murder of three ex-soldiers from your father’s unit.’
   ‘You thinkthat’s my father? It looks nothing like him.’
   ‘It could do, if he survived a serious injury.’
   ‘Which he didn’t. We’re going around in circles.’
   ‘I’m a police officer and have to assume anything’s possible. There are some questions I need to ask you.’
   ‘Fine, but I tell you now, I won’t respond to speculation.’
   Rath snapped open his notebook.‘Do you know Achim von Roddeck?’
   ‘No.’
   Rath made a tick.‘Your father never mentioned the name?’
   ‘He never spoke about the war during his visits home. One day the visits stopped.’
   ‘But you recognise it.’
   ‘Only since he’s been dragging the Engel name through the mire.’
   Rath made a second tick.‘Did you threaten Roddeck to prevent him from publishing his war memoirs?’
   ‘As I’ve already said, I won’t respond to speculation. Especially not when it is so patently absurd. Am I a suspect?’
   ‘I’m afraid I must ask for your alibi.’ Rath said. ‘Where were you last Friday around midday?’
   ‘At my mother’s house in Bonn. It was her Saint’s day on the Tuesday, and I stayed on a few days.’
   Rath made a note.‘What about the ninth of March?’
   ‘I don’t know, Inspector. What day was that?’
   ‘Thursday.’
   ‘Library, probably.’
   ‘And the twenty-first and twenty-second of February? A Tuesday and a Wednesday.’
   Engel shrugged.‘I’d need to think about that. I can tell you I didn’t kill any war veterans.’
   ‘Let me know when you remember.’ Rath put his notepad away. ‘Best to provide details of a few witnesses while you’re at it.’
   ‘Of course, if there are any.’
   ‘Did you know any of the victims? Heinrich Wosniak, Linus Meifert, Hermann Wibeau?’
   Engel shook his head.‘They all served with my father, didn’t they? Like I said, my father never discussed the war at home.’
   ‘What about the names Friedrich Grimberg and Franz Thelen?’
   Walther Engel looked surprised.‘The driver?’
   ‘I thought your father never discussed the war. How do you know his driver’s name?’
   ‘His driver? More like one of my mother’s, from the store.’
   ‘You didn’t know he chauffeured your father during the war?’
   Engel shook his head.‘Mother will have. Maybe that’s why she hired him.’
   ‘Does Thelen still work for Engel Furniture?’
   ‘No, and he hasn’t for a long time. Why are you interested in him?’
   ‘He was there at the end, so to speak. Franz Thelen witnessed the explosion that buried your father.’
   Walther Engel drew on his cigarette. After all these years, he was still preoccupied by his father’s fate.
   70
   It wasn’t so strange that people thought he was a cop, and he certainly did nothing to correct the assumption when it came up. Not that anyone came out with it in so many words, as if the termpolice were subject to an evil curse, which in these circles perhaps it was.
   He didn’t have a photograph, but he was good at describing people. Maybethat was why they thought he was a cop. Then there was the reward, dangled in front of whoever he spoke to.
   He’d got a good look at the brat at Bahnhof Zoo, each item of clothing she wore was burned on his brain. And that was how he described her too, never forgetting to add that this Hannah Singer was a dangerous lunatic.
   They treated him with respect here, in a dive bar near the Volkspark Friedrichshain. The area was chosen deliberately; the Volkspark was where he and the other Crows had picked up Hannah, years ago, when she’d first tried to escape. The locals let him sip his beer and go about his business in peace. No one asked questions, just told him what they’d heard.
   So far it was only rumours. A girl fitting Hannah’s description had been hanging around Kreuzberg and Neukölln. Others had information about her in Friedrichshain, but no one had actuallyseen her. He’d spent a day prowling the bars of Kreuzberg and Neukölln, but here, by the Volkspark, was where he’d made his base. People had to know where to find him.
   Hunched over his beer, he kept his eyes open, which was how he spotted the youth. There was something determined, something excited about him, which set him apart. The youth whispered something to the owner, whom he seemed to know, but kept looking over in his direction. When the owner moved away the youth planted himself in front of him.‘Heard you’re looking for someone?’
   For days now he had been waiting. The youth was having trouble looking him in the eye, but that was normal. In fact it made things easier.
   ‘A lunatic from the asylum they say?’
   Out of the corner of his eye, he realised his silence made the youth nervous.
   ‘Perhaps I can help you.’
   ‘Perhaps?’
   ‘What do I get out of it?’
   ‘One hundred.’
   ‘Two hundred and you have a deal.’
   ‘One hundred.’
   The youth pretended to consider if it was worth his while, but his face gave him away. He needed the cash, and one hundred marks was hardly chicken feed.
   He could have gone with two hundred, it didn’t make any difference. He wasn’t planning to pay, but yielding too quickly would make the youth suspicious.
   ‘One hundred it is.’
   For the first time he looked into the youth’s eyes, delighting in his unease. ‘But only,’ he said, holding out his hand, ‘if I catch her too.’
   They shook on it.
   71
   The pastor’s office was as Rath remembered: dominated by a huge, intimidating painting of St Norbert, filled with dark wood furniture, two windows facing onto Mühlenstrasse where the Buick gleamed in the cold winter sun. Spring came late to Berlin.
   Having postponed their appointment with Pastor Warszawski once already, today they made sure to leave the Castle in good time.
   St Norbert’s wasn’t exactly close by, nor was it Rath’s home parish, but he knew of no other Catholic priest in Berlin. After four years in this heathen city, Gereon Rath from Holy Cologne hadn’t once attended Mass but, unless he wished to be disinherited, a Catholic wedding was the only option. Rather than choosing someone unfamiliar, he had sought out Johannes Warszawski, whom he’d first met a couple of years back when Warszawski had taken an incense holder to the back of his head. After this painful greeting Rath had come to appreciate the priest, without whose help theWeisse Hand, a secret band of vigilantes who had infiltrated the Berlin Police, might never have been broken.
   All that was ancient history. The reason for today’s meeting was the so-calledBrautexamen, which the Catholic Church set all prospective spouses prior to marriage. The pastor, stocky rather than fat, sat behind his desk like a king Rath and Charly had come to beseech. The truth wasn’t so different; to marry a Protestant, Rath had to ask permission of the Holy Mother Church, and whether or not this was granted had less to do with Rath than with his Protestant bride-to-be. That is, with Charly. He hadn’t been this nervous in a long time, and just hoped she could rein in herunpredictable streak.
   So far, everything was going swimmingly. Pastor Warszawski had spoken about the deeper meaning of the marriage sacrament, about the liturgy and order of ceremony, and was noting their personal details.
   ‘Is that a spider?’ Charly asked suddenly, pointing towards the sacred image on the wall behind the priest.
   ‘St Norbert,’ Rath explained hurriedly. ‘That’s how he’s always portrayed.’
   ‘Our patron saint,’ Pastor Warszawski said. His irritability always put Rath in mind of Wilhelm Böhm.
   ‘Why’s it coming out of a chalice?’
   ‘I’ll explain later.’
   Warszawski laughed, and with his laugh the irritability was gone.‘I needn’t be concerned about someone so inquisitive. You’ll be a fast learner.’
   ‘A fast learner?’ Charly looked baffled, and Rath feared the worst. Keeping his counsel he opted to say a quick prayer…
   ‘Well,’ the pastor began, looking serious again, ‘if you are to enter into the sacred bond of marriage with your betrothed here, then the Church must ensure that any resulting offspring will be baptised as Catholics and raised in the Catholic faith. Seen thus, a little awareness of Catholic matters is no bad thing.’
   ‘Well,’ Charly said, ‘I’ve no plans to study Catholic theology.’
   For God’s sake! Rath was sweating blood.
   ‘Nor are you obliged to,’ Warszawski said. ‘These matters can just as well be explained by your husband.’ Rath nodded devotedly. ‘Very well,’ Warszawksi said. ‘Then I can tick that box too.’ He made a few ticks on the form in front of him. ‘That’s the greatest hurdle overcome.’
   More questions followed, on previous marriages, on the voluntary nature of their own vows, on possible impediments and so on, Warszawski ticking the items off one by one. Charly didn’t make any more trouble, and Rath felt relieved.
   ‘Right,’ the pastor said, skimming the form a final time, ‘that’s about it for today.’ He pushed the form across the table towards Charly and handed her his fountain pen. ‘Sign here, Fräulein Ritter.’
   Charly looked around helplessly.‘I’m sorry?’
   ‘I explained it to you,’ Rath said. ‘The Church has to be sure our children will be raised in the Catholic faith.’
   ‘You didn’t mention signing anything. I thought we were justtalking.’
   ‘It’s only a signature.’
   ‘I can’t sign this. I don’t know anything about the Catholic faith.’
   ‘Will you stop making such a fuss!’
   Pastor Warszawski gazed at him sternly, then turned to Charly.‘Now listen, young woman. I am not the Pope, nor do I presume to pass judgement on your happiness. All I’m interested in, is whether you have the necessary respect for the holy sacrament of marriage. A covenant with God is a great commitment and responsibility. If you take it seriously you willraise your children accordingly.’
   Charly nodded.‘I take it seriously,’ she said and looked at Rath.
   ‘Then you can sign.’ Warszawski handed her the fountain pen. ‘The most important thing is what’s written in your heart.’
   Charly seemed to appreciate this. She signed the document and Rath thanked God he had come to Johannes Warszawski and not one of the bigoted clerics he knew from childhood. Following Charly’s lead he signed the declaration and returned the pen to the priest.
   ‘Then it’s done,’ Warszawski said. ‘Now, I suggest we take the opportunity to schedule an appointment for confession. What do you say, Herr Rath?’
   ‘Confession?’
   ‘Of course. Best just before the marriage.’ He winked at him. ‘Which, needless to say, doesn’t mean you are free to sin with impunity until then.’
   Rath forced a smile.‘Needless to say.’
   Sitting in the car ten minutes later his principal emotion was relief. Charly had signed. The only thing that could happen now was her jilting him at the altar. He watched her out of the corner of his eye and wondered what she was thinking about.
   He was to find out soon enough.
   ‘Let’s stop at Bahnhof Zoo,’ she said, as they approached Charlottenburg. ‘We can look out for Fritze.’
   ‘The boy’s been gone three days. He isn’t coming back. Just be glad he didn’t steal anything from us.’
   Charly glared at him.‘Fritze is my only link to Hannah Singer,’ she said. ‘I have to find him.’
   ‘Charly, you’re getting too caught up in this business. You shouldn’t be neglecting your own work over it.’
   ‘My own work,’ she said contemptuously. ‘My own work is about as useful as a skin rash.’
   ‘You make it sound like a disease.’
   ‘It is.’ She looked at him. ‘Gereon, there’s something I need to confess.’
   ‘I’m the Catholic, not you.’
   ‘I was at the doctor’s today.’
   ‘Don’t say you’re…’
   ‘No!’ She laughed. ‘My God, is that all you lot can think of?’
   ‘You lot?’
   ‘Forget it.’ Charly took a piece of paper from her coat pocket. ‘I didn’t dare show this to you before but, following our meeting with the pastor, I think we should share everything.’
   They stopped at a red light on Schaperstrasse, and Rath unfolded the letter. A medical certificate. He recognised the name of the doctor, one of her friends from academia, perhaps.
   ‘You’ve been signed off for two weeks. You seemed all right last night.’ He gave her a nudge, but she batted him aside.
   ‘Cut it out.’
   ‘I was just saying.’ Since Fritze’s disappearance things were back on the up.
   ‘I had an appointment with Dieter this morning. I know it isn’t right but I can’t bear it in G Division any longer, and I can’t keep running to you.’
   ‘But two weeks… What about your inspector training?’
   She shrugged her shoulders, as if to apologise.‘I can’t go back, Gereon. Not right now. Perhaps things will be different in two weeks.’
   ‘You think? Wieking will still be there; you’ll just have to get used to her.’
   The light turned green and he stepped on the accelerator. He could see she was embarrassed, but felt this was the only way. They drove along Joachimsthaler Strasse in silence.
   ‘Paroxysmal neurasthenia,’ Rath said eventually. ‘What’s that when it’s at home?’
   ‘Nervous exhaustion.’
   He shook his head and smiled. Turning towards her he saw that she was smiling too.
   72
   Leo’s eye socket barely hurt anymore, but he still wasn’t used to the patch. It took a moment for him to recognise his reflection. The man staring back resembled a carnival-goer dressed as a pirate, or a fucking veteran. Had he really made it through the war to spend the rest of his days as a cripple?
   Without the hellish pain, he could forget he was missing an eye until life served pitiless reminders: when he banged his foot, or poured his beer next to his glass. He could no longer judge distances.
   When it came to shooting, however, he was better than ever.
   In the spacious confines of Marlow’s villa he took out his anger on empty bottles and tin cans, and there were plenty around. Boredom had seen to that.
   He had hoped to start on his list of names from that accursed SA cellar, but Marlow had brought him here to Bad Freienwalde, the arse-end of nowhere. Even Marlow seldom left the house, and never its grounds. The only person who’d stayed in Berlin was Liang. The Chinese remained in Marlow’s warehouse at the Ostbahnhof, ensuring that business continued and contacts were maintained. Including those withBerolina, with Leo’s men.
   ‘Relax, Leo,’ Marlow had said. ‘You’re safe here. Right now Berlin’s too dangerous.’
   Leo hadn’t realised it was an order until a few days later when he tried to leave. Berlin was only an hour away, and he could look after himself, but guards prevented him from getting in the car. He was still a prisoner, even if Marlow put it differently. ‘I’m protecting you from yourself,’ he said. ‘I can’t risk you falling into Lapke and the SA’s hands a second time!’
   God knows, that was the last thing on Leo’s mind.
   Let the arseholes fall intohis hands. Katsche, Lapke, Sperling, and whatever their names were. Anyone on the list in his head…
   Perhaps, he thought sometimes, as he emptied his Browning into another row of cans, it was no bad thing Marlow was holding him here. Wasn’t revenge a dish best served cold? Already, Leo savoured the fantasy in his mind. First up would be Katsche, then Lapke and Sperling.
   And not forgetting this police inspector…
   Leo hadn’t addedhis name until Freienwalde. Marlow explained why he’d had to enlist a cop to bail him out. That Dr Kohn was powerless to do anything. That it wasn’t easy prying people away from the SA.
   Leo understood all that, but then Dr M. told himwhen he had first spoken to the police inspector. Half a week before Katsche had sucked out his eyeball. Half a week!
   What had he been doing all that time? Scratching his balls?
   If this police inspector, who was supposedly in Marlow’s pocket, had taken his instructions seriously, there was no way he, Leo Juretzka, would be going around with a patch over his eye!
   He hadn’t said anything to Marlow, of course; Dr M. would have regarded it as ingratitude, and Leo didn’t want that. He had simply made a mental note of the name: Gereon Rath. Added it to the list, and taken his Browning back outside.
   73
   When Rath returned from duty on Saturday, Charly was reading with a cup of coffee in front of her on the table.
   ‘You,’ she said, and sat up.
   ‘Pleased to see me?’ he asked. Kirie pitter-pattered over to greet him. He drew back the curtain. The morning fog had lifted, the sun was shining, and for once the house was empty.
   ‘What should we do?’ he asked. ‘Take a trip to the country? It feels like Kirie needs a walk.’
   ‘Why don’t you take her then?’
   ‘I’m sorry?’
   ‘I can’t go outside! Gereon, I’m sick.’
   ‘You’re on sick leave, and fresh air is good for you. Look out of the window. Spring’s almost here.’
   ‘What if someone sees me?’ For a good Prussian like Charly it was inconceivable that she be signed off work, only to stroll blithely through town.
   Rath had pictured their weekend differently.‘You really want to spend the whole day sitting there? Someone could just as well have seen you yesterday evening at Bahnhof Zoo.’
   ‘That was different, we were looking for the boy. I can’t be going gallivanting off when my colleagues think I’m ill.’
   She sipped her coffee and turned back to her book, making a face as if her hamster had died. Rath had rarely seen her like this. Perhaps this doctor wasn’t so wrong with his ‘diagnosis’.
   ‘For God’s sake, Charly! You can’t spend the whole day in a funk just because the Nazis are in power. It’s only politics. Life goes on.’
   She looked up.‘Only politics. What’s that supposed to mean?’
   ‘You know exactly what it means. We shouldn’t be getting worked up over who’s in government. Our job is the same as before: to catch criminals.’
   ‘Is it the same though? Somehow I don’t think so.’
   ‘Something had to give after the Reichstag fire, but things have settled down in A. It’s only a matter of time before normal service is resumed with you, too.’
   ‘If nothing’s changed in two weeks, then…’
   ‘What? You’ll get another certificate? And grumble on until Hindenburg shows Hitler and his Nazis the door?’
   Charly fetched a Juno from her cigarette case and lit up.‘I don’t know, Gereon. I just know I can’t stand it right now. If I have to listen to Karin swooning over Hitler and the new age one more time… I swear I’ll strangle her.’
   ‘Ordinary people like the Nazis. They think they’re going to usher in a better future.’
   ‘I can’t think about it.’
   ‘Let’s wait and see. Striking against the Communists was a natural first move, and there are plenty who’d say not before time. By no means just Nazis.’
   ‘It sounds like you’ve given up on democracy.’ Her disappointment was plain. ‘Or worse, like you never cared about it in the first place.’
   Rath could no longer contain himself.‘Democracy!’ he said. ‘It’s all I ever hear from you. Democracy, democracy. As if it’s the only solution to Germany’s problems.’ He was surprised to find himself shouting, but continued, he had to let it all out. ‘Who’s responsible for this whole shemozzle? How is it the Nazis have a Reichstag majority? I’ll tell you. Your precious democracy. Who knows, perhaps if you women hadn’t achieved the vote in ’19 the Nazis wouldn’t be where they are now.’
   ‘I beg your pardon,’ Charly stood up and glared at him.
   ‘It’s true. Without female suffrage, they’d never have got so many votes. It’s the women who run after Hitler. I know any number.’
   ‘Any number, eh?’
   Careful… There was no way he could offer Hilde Sprenger from Cologne as an example.
   ‘Well, there’s your colleague for a start. And Wieking. Anyway, it’s true: they’d never have got this far without female suffrage.’
   It was almost as if he could hear his own father talking, and he knew he had overstepped the mark. He waited for Charly’s response. She stood with her lower lip trembling. He wanted to go to her, take her in his arms, and tell her he didn’t mean it, but she reacted first with a hard slap, before turning on her heel and exiting the room, slamming the door behind her.
   He stood rooted to the spot and moments later heard the front door snap shut. Still he couldn’t bring himself to move. His cheek was on fire, but he didn’t care.
   At least she was getting some fresh air.
   74
   Hannah wakened to the sun shining through the window and the sound of pots and pans clattering. From the kitchen next door the smell of coffee wafted towards the bed.
   The bed!
   She still had to pinch herself to be sure she wasn’t dreaming. She was in a proper bed, where she fell asleep in the evenings and wakened the next morning. Free to go at any time.
   Even so, things with Felix weren’t quite as she would have liked. Generous as he had been, at night he sought payment for his largesse and Hannah wasn’t prepared to oblige. Whenever he touched her, she was reminded of the Crows, who had taken what they wanted just so long as they were drunk enough.
   Felix wasn’t like that, he respected her ‘no’, but it did nothing for his mood, which had deteriorated so much his place had ceased to feel like home. She couldn’t give him what he wanted, and her plan was to wait for the first really warm spell to leave for somewhere she could start afresh. Until then she would continue to wash his dishes, put his dinner on the table and do whatever else was required. Except for one thing.
   She shuffled into the kitchen and couldn’t believe her eyes. Felix had made breakfast. Alongside a pot of coffee, he had managed to get hold of a few bread rolls. No one had done this for her before. No one had doneanything for her before. Felix was the first. All right, maybe Fritze too.
   ‘There you are,’ he said. ‘I was just about to wake you. Coffee?’
   She nodded and blinked into the sun, smiling at him.
   ‘Sit.’ He poured.
   ‘What a beautiful day,’ she said.
   ‘Spring’s around the corner.’
   They sat drinking coffee and dipping their bread rolls, until she felt compelled to break the silence.‘Maybe we should head out to the country,’ she suggested.
   ‘Can’t. There’s something going down.’
   ‘Can’t they leave you alone on Sundays?’
   ‘Not them. I’m working alone.’
   ‘What?’
   ‘I got a tip-off. No need for them to know. That way it might be worth it for a change.’
   ‘But how are you going to manage? On your own…’
   ‘Not quiteon my own.’ He looked at her. ‘You’re coming on look-out duty.’
   Now Hannah understood what breakfast had been about. She had been worried he might ask her something like this ever since she’d moved in; ever since she’d discovered he owed his comforts to a burglary ring. It was no secret and she had cottoned on pretty quickly. ‘I don’t know.’
   Felix looked at her in astonishment and anger.‘Where d’you think the money comes from? I thought you liked sleeping in a bed, but maybe you prefer life on the streets?’
   ‘No, no.’ Hannah was startled by his sudden unfriendliness. ‘I was just…’ She shrugged. ‘How are you going to get rid of the swag without the gang finding out?’
   ‘If that’s all your worried about, you can rest easy, it’s all in hand.’
   ‘I was just saying.’
   ‘Once it’s done we’ll go somewhere nice, just the two of us. Promise. Cinema, dinner, dancing.’
   He came across as a slightly hapless lothario. Perhaps that’s just how he was, and he was better at practical things. Where talking wasn’t required.
   He hadn’t told her where he was going to break in or what he was going to steal. It couldn’t be anything heavy since they weren’t even taking a handcart, let alone the truck the ring used to stow their loot, and which he was sometimes permitted to drive. That’s what he claimed, but Hannah suspected he was showing off. A burglary ring would never let a boy without a license behind the wheel.
   Whatever, right now, they were on foot, crossing the Thielen Bridge towards Kreuzberg until Görlitzer Bahnhof, where they walked through the dark, piss-stained Görlitzer pedestrian tunnel to reach the other end of the station. From there it was under the elevated railway at Schlesisches Tor, until, finally, reaching a small square, they turned into a blind alley somewhere between Köpenicker Strasse and the Spree.
   The cobbled path where they halted was like a cross between a factory site and a rear courtyard, surrounded as it was by dilapidated brick buildings, which could have been large workshops or small factories. The blind alley ended at a loading dock from which several doors led into the heart of one of the buildings. The colour had started to flake from the signs. OHLIGS CABINETMAKERS, Hannah read, next to an enamel sign advertising spark plugs. Was this even public land?
   ‘Don’t worry,’ Felix said, his voice low. ‘It’s only busy during the week. Right now there isn’t a soul for miles.’
   ‘What about the people who live here?’
   ‘They won’t come near the yard. Besides, they’re all at worship. The Protestants in the Emmaus Church, and the Catholics in the Liebfrauen.’
   ‘What about the Jews?’
   ‘There’s only you.’ Felix fetched his picklocks from his pocket and made a serious face. ‘No point being scared. Keep your eyes open, and if you see anyone, whistle.’
   ‘Whistle? Isn’t that a little obvious?’
   ‘A tune, so that no one gets suspicious. As if you’re just whistling to yourself. Clear?’
   She nodded, and Felix jumped onto the ramp, where he fiddled around until a door opened and he vanished inside.
   75
   He missed the dog most of all. At night when she lay at the foot of the sofa it felt as if he had found a friend. It wasn’t easy getting used to life on the streets again after two nights under a warm blanket with a roof over his head, and two days in which he realised there was such a thing as family, or at least such a thing as home.
   Herr Rath had been right to show him the door. A boy like Fritze Thormann didn’t belong in Charlottenburg, not in an apartment like that with a couple soon to be married. Still, something in him didn’t understand why he had been chucked out. He ought to have been grateful for the ten marks. Instead, not for the first time, he had choked back tears.
   Idiot,why do you have to kid yourself? Stop dreaming! Open your eyes and see life for what it is!
   Then there was the dog… He wondered if he should get a thing like that, then he wouldn’t be so alone. A dog could protect him, even if it would make finding a bed that much harder. Already he had been forced to sleep rough, since his old haunts were taken and for the first time in weeks he had failed to find anywhere new. At least it wasn’t so cold now, spring was on its way, not that he slept any better for it.
   Luck had deserted him, even begging wasn’t the same. In the meantime he had given up any hope of seeing Hannah again. If this cripple really did mean to kill her then it was best she keep a low profile, but he still caught himself looking for her, begging at a new station each day. As he spoke with people and kept an eye out for cops, time and again he found his gaze drawn to girls who resembled her.
   Using his takings to buy a hot broth near Schlesischer Bahnhof yesterday lunchtime, he had overheard people on the next table discussing a man who had promised money for information. Fritze couldn’t understand everything, but there was talk of an escaped lunatic and it sounded very much like Hannah. Even so, it wasn’t until he heard the wordscar-face that his ears really pricked up. It wasn’t a cop who was looking for her, nor a warder from the asylum, but the man who’d chased her out of Bahnhof Zoo! The man who was trying to kill her, if what Charly said was right. Aunt Charlotte. He had liked her, had thought she trusted him, yet here he was back on the streets.
   Görlitzer Bahnhof wasn’t a great spot. Most people were from Cottbus or Breslau and barely had money for tickets, but today the sun was out and good weather put people in a good mood, which made them more generous.
   As usual he kept an eye out for Hannah as he put the moves on passers-by, when all at once he saw something familiar. Not a girl with a red beret, but a man with a dark winter coat and bowler hat. And a strange, unrhythmic gait.
   He looked again, but the man had disappeared. Were his eyes playing tricks? The lady he’d asked for fare money shook her head as he hared off in pursuit of the bowler hat. Forget the money! This was his route back to Charly.
   He was too small to make out the hats bobbing up and down, but luckily there weren’t many bowlers. Most wore flat caps like his own. Four or five hats appeared again and again in the sea of heads, but only one moved erratically.
   Fritze didn’t know what to do. Tell Charly? He had already taken forty pfennigs this morning. Should he spend ten on a call? Charlottenburg was a long way away. By the time she got here he might have lost him. His eyes flitted between the telephone booths on Spreewaldplatz and the crowds.
   76
   Hannah stood in the yard feeling unspeakably alone. Noises she had scarcely heard moments before suddenly seemed very loud. Wind rattling sheet metal. The thunder of the elevated railway. Was that something from the workshop? What if they caught Felix in the act?
   Don’t get worked up, girl!
   Ten minutes, he’d said. How long had she been waiting already? She decided to count to pass the time and distract from her fear.
   Twenty-one, twenty-two…
   Stay calm, she told herself. You’re not doing anything illegal just standing here.
   … thirty-nine, forty…
   There’s only you.
   How did he know she was Jewish? Had they discussed it? Unlikely, it was hardly important. Perhaps she looked Jewish? She had never thought about it before.
   Just keep counting.
   … eighty-seven, eighty-eight…
   Reaching one hundred and eighty-seven she heard footsteps from somewhere beyond the bend, from the alleyway that led onto Köpenicker Strasse and which was invisible from here.
   Shit! They should have gone to the country after all. But… it didn’t have to mean anything. Why shouldn’t someone be approaching? It didn’t have to be a worker, and certainly not a cop.
   She started whistling. She didn’t know many tunes and plumped for Üb immer Treu und Redlichkeit.
   She tried not to look, making as if she were more interested in one of the other doors leading onto the courtyard, as far away as possible from the cabinetmaker’s workshop where Felix had vanished.
   She whistled louder and for a moment the footsteps appeared to die, but then they drew closer and from the corner of her eye she saw a shadow. Whoever it was didn’t seem to be heading for the workshop. That was good, but they were coming towardsher.
   Feverishly she tried to think of a story, when suddenly the shadow made a strange, lopsided movement, as if the person it belonged to was drunk or had a… limp!
   She ceased whistling, the final note stuck in her throat.
   ‘Do carry on. It’s such a lovely tune.’
   That familiar old voice… She turned around and there he was, twisting his scar-face into a grin. He was on her at once, with astonishing speed, much quicker than she’d have thought possible. Huckebein was still nimble, still strong. A soldier. He’d been the same in the Crow’s Nest, despite his leg.
   He had boxed her into a corner. In his right hand was the long dagger which, he used to boast, had seen off countless Frogs and Tommys. Her eyes darted this way and that. If she could get past him maybe she’d have a chance. Goddamn blind alley!
   She lunged right, only to swerve left, and he fell for it. She had just about evaded him when there was a stabbing pain in her arm and side, and she felt herself seized by an ice-cold hand. She was losing her balance, tumbling with him to the floor. The dagger slid across the cobbles with a clink. She must have knocked it out of his hand, or he’d lost it in the fall. Either way the thing was a few metres behind them on the pavement, so too his bowler, spinning around like a drunken whirligig.
   Huckebein was no longer armed, but then neither was she, and he had her in his grasp.
   She defended herself but, as ever, had no chance. After a brief, wordless tussle, he forced her onto her back and kneeled on her arms. She thrashed her legs, but it was no use. He had her at his mercy. Her impotence made her angry, gave her newfound strength, but still she was no match. Only now did it occur to her that she wasn’t alone. That she could cry for help. ‘Felix!’
   The grin made his face even more repulsive.
   ‘Your Felix is long gone. Who do you think it was that shopped you?’ She let out a shrill cry, and he held her mouth closed. ‘There’s no one here. Save your breath. You’re going to need it.’ His hands gripped her throat. ‘You could have had a quick and painless death, but you know I prefer it this way.’
   She gasped for air, felt the strength being sucked from her body. Desperation kicked in, but it was hopeless. She couldn’t move her arms under the weight of his knees, didn’t even reach him with her legs. She wriggled like a fish on dry land until her panic was replaced by fatigue, and a desire for peace. Why not just yield?
   All at once she felt the pressure on her neck subside and the weight on her arms grow lighter. Hope returned and, with it, the will to live. She gulped air into her lungs as Huckebein’s shadow emerged through blurred streaks of light, waving its hands as if to banish an invisible swarm of wasps. She heard her frantic breath, and Huckebein’s cry.
   Then all was still.
   77
   It was early for cognac, but the glass Rath poured after finishing breakfast (mainly coffee) helped dispel his hangover. The telephone had wakened him around ten. He staggered over, but by the time he got there the caller had hung up.
   Charly, was his first thought, but he had resisted the temptation to call Greta. There was no question that’s where she was. Other women might go to their mother; Charly went to Greta. What was up with her? How could she let a harmless discussion about politics spiral like that?
   After she had gone he had smoked two cigarettes, fed Kirie and left her in the care of the porter, and headed out along the Ku’damm to the Kakadu-Bar.
   Despite the national uprising, business was much the same. The music was still good and American, the booze likewise, and, with the right change in your pocket, you could forget about the world outside, which was precisely what Rath intended to do, sampling a few drinks as he listened to the music and the chatter of his fellow patrons.
   Still, Charly was on his mind and he had spent the evening being angry at her, longing for her, and drinking himself into a stupor. Back home he reached for the cognac, and so found sleep.
   Since being wakened he hadn’t taken his eyes off the telephone, but it hadn’t rung again. Unless he’d missed a second call when he was under the shower?
   One more cognac, he thought, then it’ll be time for Kirie’s walk. After that, we’ll see. He felt a strong urge to drive by Spenerstrasse with a bouquet of flowers, but his pride told him to wait for her to call and apologise. He was so focused on the telephone he needed a moment to realise the doorbell was ringing.
   He ran into the bathroom to put a comb through his still-wet hair and check his shirt and tie before going to answer it. Kirie was there already, wagging her tail expectantly.
   He hesitated, took a deep breath and opened, at pains to appear as indifferent as possible. It was Fritze. Rath was stunned into silence. The boy seemed equally put out, having no doubt expected Charly to answer.
   ‘I’ve found Hannah,’ he mumbled.
   ‘You’ve what?’
   ‘She said to tell you. I have Hannah.’ Fritze looked at him anxiously, stealing a glance inside. ‘Where’s Charly?’
   Rath thought there was a note of desperation in the boy’s voice. ‘Not here,’ he said, sternly.
   Fritze looked at him as if wondering if he could really trust this man. It was a moment before he spoke again.‘Something terrible has happened. You need to help us.’ Heavy sobs racked his body.
   Rath took the boy into the apartment and closed the door.‘What’s the matter?’ he asked. The boy didn’t seem to hear. Rath steered him into the kitchen and sat him on a chair, a sobbing marionette.
   Rarely had he felt so helpless. He hated situations like this. Hated them so much he made the call he had been shirking from all morning. As the operator patched him through he was secretly glad it had nothing to do with yesterday’s fight.
   Greta answered.‘Charly’s not here,’ she said, almost as soon as she heard his voice. He hadn’t even asked for her.
   ‘Tell her Fritze is back.’
   ‘Fritze who?’
   ‘Just tell her, for fuck’s sake! Fritze is here and I need to speak with her. So would you please just get her.’
   ‘First, I won’t be sworn at. And second, I won’t be ordered around.’
   ‘You stupid cow…’
   Click.
   If there was one woman who could make his blood boil quicker than Charly, it was Greta Overbeck. He slammed the phone down. What was he supposed to do with the boy howling in his kitchen?
   Settle him first. Rath went back into the kitchen, where Fritze had at last stopped crying. He was sitting on the chair stroking Kirie. His eyes were still moist, but he had wiped the tears from his face.
   ‘Sorry. I don’t usually cry like that but…’
   ‘It’s fine,’ Rath said. ‘My father wouldn’t let me cry, but sometimes there’s no other way.’
   ‘All the same. Don’t tell anyone. That goes for Charly too.’
   ‘Your secret’s safe.’ Rath filled a glass with water and sat next to him. Fritze drank, and the water seemed to calm him.
   ‘I can’t get hold of Charly,’ Rath said. The news didn’t unsettle the boy as much as he’d feared. ‘Now tell me what happened. You found Hannah.’ Fritze nodded. ‘And where is she now?’
   ‘Kreuzberg.’
   ‘You said something terrible has happened. Is she hurt?’
   Fritze looked at him despairingly.‘She’s bleeding. I think she needs a doctor, but she won’t see one, or go near a hospital, so I thought I’d get Charly.’ He was on the verge of tears again.
   ‘What happened?’
   ‘It was him again… he had Hannah… and then…’ The boy shrugged. Helplessly. ‘What was I supposed to do?’
   ‘What is it? What did you do?’ Wrong question. The boy was racked with sobs once more. ‘All right. It’s all right. Can you take me to her?’
   Less than five minutes later they were in the car racing east across Budapester Strasse. Fritze couldn’t say exactly where they were headed, only that he had boarded a train at Schlesisches Tor.
   Rath hurtled along the Landwehr Canal and Gitschiner Strasse, as if racing the elevated train. Time was of the essence. Hannah had stab wounds, and if Rath understood correctly the man with the scars was responsible. He wondered if Hannah Singer might hold the key to their mystery killer after all. The girl had got herself to safety, and Fritze had gone in search of help.
   As they approached Schlesisches Tor Rath took his foot off the gas.‘Where now?’
   ‘Take the next street. It’s on the right.’
   Fritze led him to an old, decommissioned cinema that had fallen victim to either the financial crisis or the advent of sound, perhaps both. The entrance was sealed with chains and padlocks.
   ‘In there? It looks like a fortress. How do you get in?’
   ‘Follow me.’
   They went around the building into a rear courtyard where the back entrance was also sealed. Fritze cleared a few crates, and pointed to an air shaft. He might pass through, and Hannah too, but it was too narrow for a grown man.
   ‘We can’t go that way,’ Rath said, rummaging in his coat pocket for his picklocks, whereupon he began fiddling with one of the padlocks. Fritze looked on in admiration. Rath opened the door, which must have been an emergency exit at one time, and they slipped straight into the theatre. What daylight filtered through the crack revealed row upon row of dusty, moth-eaten seats.
   ‘She’s in there,’ Fritze said, pointing in the direction of the screen, and the contours of an enormous cinema organ. ‘It’s us. Don’t worry, everything’s going to be all right.’
   No response. Fritze climbed up the organ pipes. Rath sighed and followed him up the small ladder.
   Based on the police photos alone he wouldn’t have recognised Hannah Singer. Her hair was different, and her face too. Definitely not crazy. She looked as if she were sleeping. He crouched beside her and felt her pulse.
   ‘Is she…’ Fritze didn’t dare finish his question.
   ‘She’s alive,’ Rath said, ‘but she urgently needs a doctor. She’s lost a lot of blood.’
   ‘No doctor.’ A quiet, reedy voice.
   ‘Hannah,’ Rath said. ‘Try to stay awake. We’re here to help you.’
   ‘No doctor…’ was all she said.
   ‘Talk to her,’ Rath was already descending the ladder. ‘Make sure she stays conscious.’ The boy crouched beside her. ‘I know someone who can help. Tell her I’m getting help. She needn’t worry. No doctor, no hospital. Everything will be all right. Tell her, talk to her!’
   78
   Charly called back, but he wasn’t picking up. Greta had meant well, and she had a gift for fobbing people off. ‘You have to keep them on tenterhooks,’ she had said. ‘Believe me, it helps.’
   ‘What did he want?’
   ‘What do you think? He wanted you back. “I need to speak with her,” he said. Swore at me too.’
   ‘He did?’
   ‘Called me a stupid cow.’
   ‘Just like that?’
   ‘What do you mean, just like that? He insisted I go and fetch you because of this boy, and…’
   ‘This boy? Fritze?’
   Before Greta confirmed the name Charly knew she had to call Carmerstrasse, and when Gereon didn’t answer her mind was made up. ‘I’m going back.’
   So here she was sitting in the empty flat, edgy as a cat on a hot tin roof, drinking her second coffee and wondering what to do next. The porter, Bergner, confirmed that Gereon had left the house with Kirie and a boy in tow,‘your nephew, Fräulein Ritter.’ He didn’t know where they were headed, of course, only that they were in a rush.
   She racked her brains over what could have happened, but there was nothing to do now but wait, drink coffee, and smoke.
   Her guilty conscience stirred. She shouldn’t have slapped him yesterday, or run away, she’d realised that almost as soon as her anger subsided. Why did he have to talk such nonsense?Female suffrage had brought Hitler to power? When it came to politics Gereon was a fool, and he wasn’t the only one in this country.
   She didn’t know how long she’d been waiting, but at some point she heard footsteps in the stairwell, several people, the pitter-patter of a dog… She stubbed out her cigarette and stood up. The door opened, and Kirie ran to greet her. Then came Fritze, throwing his thin arms around her as if he never wanted to let go. ‘What’s the matter?’ she asked.
   Gereon took the key from the lock and shrugged. Fritze was more forthcoming after she’d made him a few sandwiches in the kitchen. Scarface man had appeared again, and injured Hannah, but thanks to Gereon she was now safe because this Chinese had come and…
   ‘Chinese?’ she said, looking at Gereon.
   ‘Hannah didn’t want to see a doctor or go to the hospital. She was right, too. They’d have sent her straight back to Dalldorf. Is that what you would have wanted?’
   ‘Who was this Chinese?’
   ‘A man who owed me a favour.’
   ‘And he’s a doctor.’
   ‘Let’s say he knows his way around a scalpel.’ He glared as if in preparation for another fight. ‘She was bleeding to death. Damn it, Charly, where would you have sent her? To your doctor friend? An arsonist, a mass murderer?’
   Fritze’s eyes opened wide at the word ‘murderer’ and Charly could have kicked Gereon for being so crude. Too late.
   ‘I didn’t mean to,’ the boy said, looking as if he might burst into tears at any moment. ‘Really I didn’t, but what was I s’posed to do? The bastard would have strangled her otherwise!’
   She looked at Gereon.‘What is he talking about?’ she asked.
   ‘It was self-defence, Aunt Charly!’ Fritze looked at her as if she might send him back into care. ‘This strange, pointy thing was just lying there and I… All of a sudden he wasn’t moving anymore.’
   79
   Charly sat on the passenger seat in silence, barely deigning to look at him, and then only to make it known that all this washis doing. For the second time that day Rath drove eastwards, this time watching his speed so as to avoid being pulled over by a colleague. This was not now a matter of life and death, but death alone.
   It was approaching dusk when they arrived. Fritze’s description had been good, a dilapidated factory site off Köpenicker Strasse. A weathered sign directed them towards Ohligs cabinetmakers. Rath drove past the yard entrance and parked the Buick a little further down. Returning on foot Charly put her arm in his, whether because she wanted to or to avoid attention, he couldn’t say. There weren’t many people about, the buildings were mostly abandoned and, it being Sunday, those that were still occupied were empty. But what if A Division were waiting somewhere in the wings?
   He hadn’t told her where Hannah had been taken. It was pure chance he’d got hold of Liang in Marlow’s office at the old Ostbahnhof, as Dr M. had temporarily struck camp, gone to ground like his loyal henchman Leo Juretzka. Clearly the SA had the Berlin underworld running scared. Liang hadn’t askedmany questions, just looked at the bandage, which in the meantime Fritze had replaced, and nodded his agreement. Together they carried the girl out of the cinema and laid her gently on the rear seat of the black Adler sedan, otherwise used to wheel Johann Marlow around town.
   ‘Will they be able to help her?’ Fritze had asked, as the vehicle rolled out of the yard.
   ‘If anyone can, it’s them.’
   Rath prayed to God he was right. That would be the only justification in the inevitable reckoning with Charly.
   ‘He just happened to run into her?’ she asked, disbelievingly. ‘Who goes around a place like thisvoluntarily?’
   Rath shrugged.‘He must have known Hannah was here. Why else would he head straight over from Görlitzer Bahnhof?’
   ‘Without realising a certain someone was following close behind.’
   They had reached an uninviting-looking cobbled path that took them beyond the road.
   ‘This is where Fritze must have lost him,’ said Rath. ‘Until he heard Hannah cry out.’
   The boy had told them what happened before they set out: how, reaching the yard, he had seen scarface man crouched over Hannah, choking her; how he had taken the dagger and stabbed, again and again, until the man simply keeled over and ceased to move.
   They followed the winding path. Everywhere around, piles of junk obstructed their view. A God-forsaken place, brick buildings falling to ruin, most of the windows shattered by stray or well-aimed stones. The path led to a rear courtyard, which couldn’t be seen from the road.
   The building Fritze had described was unmistakable. A pool of blood had formed on the pavement; a trail of blood led up the ramp to a door that was slightly ajar.
   ‘We couldn’t just leave the corpse in the yard, so we hauled it inside. Wasn’t easy, I tell you.’ Fritze was certain no one had seen them. ‘Everything around there’s empty. The most you’ll find is a few stray tramps.’
   The buildings lining the yard looked as if they were waiting to be torn down. No one had worked here for years. Charly looked around.‘Doesn’t seem like A Division have been here.’
   ‘Or else Gennat’s already waiting inside for us with the corpse.’
   For a brief moment she looked horrified. Was there no end to Buddha’s talents, her gaze seemed to ask. Rath knew better. If the corpse had been discovered a uniformed cop would be stationed outside. ‘There’s no one here,’ he said. ‘I’ll go first if you like. If the worst comes to the worst, you can say you just drove me.’
   ‘Rubbish. We go together.’
   Inside was pitch-black. Rath turned his flashlight on an abandoned workshop which smelled of rotting wood. In the far corner was a dead man among sawdust coloured red by blood. He shone his light on the corpse. The face was hideously scarred, and there was no denying the resemblance to the wanted poster from Magdeburg. Any resemblance to the pre-war photo of the dapper Captain Benjamin Engel was less pronounced. Rath struggled to imagine how such damage could be done to a face.
   As Charly stared at the corpse he realised that, despite all her previous work for Homicide, she had seldom seen a dead body.‘It could be Krumbiegel,’ she said.
   Rath searched the dead man’s coat pockets, but found only a half-empty wallet, a used handkerchief and a blood-stained, pointed weapon. ‘No service record, nothing,’ he said, holding the dagger to the light. The blade, if that’s what this tapered skewer was, was triangular. ‘But this is the murder weapon. My money’s on Engel.’
   ‘What’s he got against Hannah?’
   ‘No idea, but what could your Krumbiegel, supposing he killed Wosniak, have against Hermann Wibeau, and Linus Meifert?’
   ‘What if they’re one and the same? Perhaps Engel assumed Krumbiegel’s identity. Maybe he stumbled on Krumbiegel’s service record fleecing some corpse on the battlefield. It’s possible.’
   ‘That’s pure speculation!’
   The man’s eyes staring out of the network of scars were devoid of life. Rath turned him over. The back of his dark winter coat was covered in sawdust, the blood-soaked fabric glistening damp in the light of the torch. No doubt about it, he was dead.
   ‘Well, that’s just great,’ Charly said. ‘What now? Another case for your Chinese friend?’
   ‘Certainly not.’ What might the consequences be of sharinganother deadly secret with Johann Marlow?‘The obvious thing for Prussian officers such as ourselves would be to alert the Castle and await the arrival of Forensics.’
   ‘The obvious thing… but how do we explain to Gennat what we’re doing here? Not to mention the fact that I’m supposed to be laid up in bed.’
   ‘Then go home, and leave the rest to me.’
   ‘This isn’t just about me. Or you.’ She glared at him. ‘Fritze trusts us. You want to drag him into this?’
   ‘It was self-defence.’
   ‘Oh yeah, and who’s going to corroborate that?’
   ‘Hannah Singer, for one.’
   ‘Hannah Singer is Fritze’s only witness, andif she pulls through, I don’t intend to let the state anywhere near her.’
   ‘Charly, the girl is a fugitive from the asylum. A mass murderer!’
   ‘Hannah Singer is a girl who was forced into a slave’s existence by bastards like that…’ she gestured towards the dead man. ‘…who liberated herself in an act of desperation. Precisely because the state authorities were in no position to help.’
   ‘Charly, Charly. What are you saying?’ Rath shook his head. ‘The deceased is a mass murderer. The man I’ve been hunting for weeks.’
   ‘Then he has his just deserts,’ she said.
   ‘You’re not serious, are you? What do you suggest we do?’
   ‘I suggest wedon’t argue about it, for a start.’
   ‘Let’s call it in, and I take responsibility for the corpse. That way we keep the kids out of it.’ And get some decent press into the bargain.Detective Inspector Rath Bags Dangerous Serial Killer, he could use a headline like that.
   ‘What will you say to Gennat?’
   ‘Self-defence. He tried to stab me, I defended myself.’
   ‘Apart from the fact that you’d have to explain why you cornered him here of all places… Why didn’t you use your service weapon? Why did you cut him with his own trench dagger? Like a pig.’ She pointed to the corpse. ‘There are at least half a dozen stab wounds, maybe more.’
   ‘I’ll think of something.’
   ‘Why did you drag his corpse into the workshop? And notify Homicide…’ she looked at her watch. ‘…six and a half hours later?’
   Rath gave up. Charly was right. Gennat would unravel his lies before they were through the first slice of cake. Then she explained her plan.
   From the very first, Rath knew it was a crackpot idea, but since he could think of nothing better, he agreed. Taking the rain barrel that stood brim-full under a downpipe they tipped most of its contents onto the pool of blood, saving the rest for the trail on the ramp. Then they returned to the car and drove back to Charlottenburg.
   PART III
   ASH
   Monday 27th March to
   Friday 26th May 1933
   These days journalists look on such harmless professions as tightrope-walking or roofing with envy.DIE WELTBÜHNE, 21st FEBRUARY 1933
   Ash, non-combustible residue left after the burning of plant or animal substances.MEYERS GROSSES KONVERSATIONS-LEXICON, 1905
   80
   It was the kind of Monday morning that Rath could do without. Having barely slept, he was looking forward to a quiet start when Erika Voss told him that the police commissioner wanted a word urgently. For the third time in the space of a month. No commissioner had wished to see him as often as Magnus von Levetzow.
   Urgently, yet already Rath had waited a full half an hour outside his office. Dagmar Kling, who had outlasted Kurt Melcher, Albert Grzesinski and Karl Zörgiebel, went about her work unperturbed, having witnessed many things including the arrest of a serving commissioner by the Reichswehr. Poor sinners such as Gereon Rath were the least of her concerns.
   He had no idea what the summons was about, only that it meant missing morning briefing and his sole remaining link with day-to-day case work. More manhunt than murder inquiry, the search for Benjamin Engel was anything other than a classic Homicide investigation. By this point Rath’s task of reconstructing the circumstances around the deaths of the three former soldiers had been superseded by the order to look for a man who left no trace, and wasn’t about to start.
   On his way to Alex, he had taken a detour via the Brommy Bridge, but couldn’t approach the shore without stopping and getting out of the car. Was that why Levetzow wished to speak with him, because they had found the corpse? But then, wouldn’t it beGennat who summoned him? Perhaps they had been seen. Someone might have spotted the Buick on Köpenicker Strasse and noted the registration. If so, he’d have some explaining to do.
   Last night, the first of the new moon, had been ideal. They had returned to Köpenicker Strasse around midnight, dressed in black and wearing gloves, to find the thread Rath had attached to the door still intact, and the dead man exactly where they had left him. They had brought a clothes line, and a sheet for the corpse. Though the blood had already coagulated, it still left red streaks on the white cotton. Charly was about to start wrapping when Rath gestured to wait, and vanished into the yard to fetch cobblestones.
   ‘We need weight,’ he whispered, before venturing outside three more times. Satisfied that the bundle was heavy enough, they tied it and exited through one of the rear doors that led onto the river.
   A cold wind was blowing, and a veil of mist had settled on the Spree. When they switched off their flashlights, the only light came from the gas lamps on the Brommy Bridge. They wouldn’t be the first to pass a dead man into the care of these waters, Rath thought. The bundle was impossibly heavy, an impossible carry, but somehow they managed to haul it across the threshold and drag it to the water where they gave it one last shove. Watching the blood-stained bundle slowly tip forward and slide into the murky depths, they understood there was no going back and that this secret would bind them closer than any marriage ceremony.
   ‘Inspector Rath?’ Dagmar Kling’s voice returned him to the present. ‘The commissioner will see you now.’
   He stood up and entered Levetzow’s office, where the commissioner sat behind his desk. ‘Well, Inspector?’
   ‘Sir?’
   ‘Any information you’d care to divulge?’
   Well, I found the trench dagger killer, along with his trench dagger, only the man was dead and, being unable to confirm his identity or motives, I preferred to make his corpse disappear. That’ll be an end to the murders, and that’s good news, isn’t it?
   ‘Nothing, Sir.’
   ‘As I feared, and precisely the reason I summoned you.’ Levetzow paused, but Rath chose to remain silent and listen. ‘A week ago I asked you to keep me informed on developments in the Engel investigation. Why have I heard nothing?’
   ‘There haven’t been any, Sir.’
   ‘You see! That’s your problem right there,’ suddenly Levetzow was pounding his fist on the table. ‘No developments in aweek! Damn it, man, I put you on the bastard because I thought you were young and ambitious, and exactly the right man for the job. A Rottweiler, ready to snap.’
   ‘Sorry if I’ve disappointed you, Sir, but I have reason to suppose this Engel, this trench dagger killer, has gone to ground.’
   ‘What makes yousuppose that?’
   Rath couldn’t pretend the killer was still out there, threatening the life of esteemed ex-lieutenant and author Achim von Roddeck. ‘Let’s call it investigative instinct, Sir. There’s no trace of him anywhere. I’m certain he won’t kill again. Lieutenant von Roddeck need no longer fear for his life.’
   ‘You presume to dictate Achim von Roddeck’s security arrangements?’
   ‘That wasn’t my intention, Sir.’
   ‘These wishy-washy statements. This waffle about feelings and instincts. These positivelyreckless suggestions of yours… They only harden my resolve!’ Magnus von Levetzow turned red in the face. ‘Inspector, I am relieving you of this case. Detective Gräf and Cadet Steinke will take over with immediate effect. I would ask you to pass on all relevant documents and report to Superintendent Gennat.’
   Gräf, of all people! Was he being replaced by a lower-ranking officer to humiliate him? He pretended contrition but felt relief. He had blown it with the new commissioner, but experience told him that where commissioners were concerned, the Castle was a revolving door. Magnus von Levetzow was already the fourth since he’d started in Berlin, and Rath was certain he wouldn’t be the last.
   ‘You can go.’ Levetzow thrust his right arm forward with a brisk ‘Heil Hitler!’
   This time Rath was ready for it. He raised his right arm, in a manner similar to Hitler himself, but not as briskly, rather, casually, limply, as if he were saying‘Hello’, and his ‘Heil’ sounded more like aHi. The commissioner shooed him away like a disobedient dog. For the time being he was in the clear, and it was unlikely he’d have to return anytime soon. When that day came, he doubted very much that a Nazi would still be in post. Melcher, the previous incumbent, had lasted barely half a year, and Gereon Rath was more than happy to wait his successor out.

   They could hardly wait. Before the lunch break had begun Gräf appeared with a cardboard box under his arm and Cadet Steinke in tow. The meeting was an embarrassment for Gräf, but Steinke had no such qualms. ‘We require all documents pertaining to the Wosniak, Meifert and Wibeau investigations,’ he said, as if he were Rath’s commanding officer.
   Rath fetched the three files from the cabinet and made a pile of them on his desk, leaving the Bülowplatz file and observation reports from Bonn in his drawer.
   ‘I’m sorry, Gereon,’ Gräf said. ‘It’s what the commissioner wants. I’d rather we could keep working together.’
   ‘It’s fine,’ Rath said, returning to the unspectacular case Gennat had assigned him, most likely a suicide, a contemporary for whom the national uprising wasn’t asuplifting as for the majority of his fellow citizens. Shopkeeper Daniel Rothstein had been found dead in his bed in Wilmersdorf and so far there was nothing to suggest foul play, unless, that is, someone had forced him to ingest the bottle of Veronal that lay empty by his bedside table.
   Gräf unloaded the contents of his cardboard box into his desk drawers while Steinke moved the files from Rath’s desk onto Gräf’s and reached for the visitor’s chair.
   ‘What the hell is this?’ Rath demanded.
   ‘We’re merging the three files into a single dossier,’ Steinke said. ‘The Alberich file, the commissioner suggested. I think that’s what we’re calling it, right, Sir?’
   ‘You can call it the Arsehole file for all I care,’ Rath glared at Steinke. ‘What I want to know is why you pair of jokers think you can spread yourselves aroundmy office.’
   Gräf rediscovered his voice. ‘This is my desk. We have to work somewhere.’
   ‘And this room is my office. It says so on the door. If you want to take up with a new… partner, you’ll have to find somewhere else. With the Politicals for all I care. That’s where you two sweethearts have come from, isn’t it?’
   Gräf packed his things back into the cardboard box. Steinke, however, wasn’t prepared to go down without a fight. ‘Inspector,’ he said, ‘your tone ill becomes you…’
   ‘Zip it, Steinke,’ Gräf shouted. ‘Take your goddamn files. You heard what he said. We’ll find somewhere else.’
   The smirk disappeared from Steinke’s face. He took the files from the desk and followed Gräf outside. Rath knew Gräf was no fan of the Nazi careerist, and was all the more tickled by the commissioner’s decision to lump them together. The pair had distinguished themselves as avid supporters of the national uprising during their stint with the Politicals. How nice to see these spiritual comrades at loggerheads despite their common ground.
   ‘Shut the door!’ Rath yelled, and Steinke’s wobbly pile of files almost toppled to the floor.
   81
   Charly drew on her cigarette.‘Perhaps it was the boycott,’ she said.
   Gereon was focused on the traffic. It wasn’t yet five but already they were driving out of town on Landsberger Allee, one of Berlin’s major arterial roads. She didn’t know what Gereon had said to get off work, nor did she care, her sense of duty being currently at odds with the Prussian gold standard. Which wasn’t to say she had nointerest in Gereon’s latest investigation, a suicide with no farewell note. In the three days since Levetzow had taken him off the Alberich case, he had yet to establish a motive.
   ‘This Rothstein,’ she continued, ‘had a little toy shop on Knesebeckstrasse, didn’t he? Perhaps he killed himself fearing the Jewish boycott would drive him to ruin.’
   The papers had been full of it for days. As revenge for, supposedly Jewish, atrocity propaganda in the foreign press, a nationwide boycott of Jewish businesses was to be observed this coming Saturday. By now theCentral Committee for the Prevention of Jewish Inflammatory and Atrocity Propaganda had sent its call to editorial offices up and down the land, and the newspapers had printed their text in full, even theVossische. Reading about it, you’d think a national holiday was being observed, complete with parades and demonstrations. Where the new regime was concerned, parades and demonstrations seemed to go with the territory.
   ‘Bit much, don’t you think?’ Gereon asked.
   ‘What?’
   ‘Killing yourself for something like that. Who takes this sort of thing seriously? It’s just the Nazis shooting their mouths off again. Do you really think Berliners are going to be told where to shop?’
   ‘Perhaps it wasn’t suicide and the SA have him on their conscience.’
   ‘You should be careful saying that sort of thing.’
   ‘Gereon, if we can’t speak freely in your car, where can we?’
   ‘The man took to his bed following an overdose of Veronal. No external injuries. Doesn’t sound like the SA to me.’
   ‘You’re right. The SA would be sure to roughhouse any Jew they laid their hands on.’ The brick buildings of the Lichtenberg Waterworks flitted past as they approached the city boundary. ‘How far is it to Freienwalde?’
   ‘About an hour’s drive.’
   She could hardly wait to see Hannah again, having known since Monday where she was being kept.
   Gereon had sounded like a doctor:‘She’s lost a lot of blood. It will be some time before she’s healed properly but, all things considered, she seems to be making a steady recovery.’
   ‘Freienwalde? Why is she in Freienwalde?’
   He had hesitated a moment before replying.‘Because Johann Marlow has a house there. Because there she’ll be safe.’
   ‘The Johann Marlow? Dr M.?’ She couldn’t believe it.
   ‘She’s in better hands with him than with your doctor friend.’ That much was true. Dieter was a neurologist, not someone familiar with haemorrhaging and stab wounds.
   ‘I thought you’d cut all ties with Marlow.’
   ‘I have, but he still owes me a favour.’
   ‘There’s a name for that, you know? You’re a police officer, allowing a criminal…’
   ‘Marlow’s no criminal.’
   ‘Of course he is, just smart enough not to get caught.’
   ‘That’s why Hannah is in safe hands. He knows how to handle a situation like this.’
   ‘Right… probably because his men are treated for gunshot or stab wounds every day. Gereon, you must realise that a police officer shouldn’t be associating with people like that.’
   ‘Nor should they be casting murder victims into the Spree by night.’
   Charly had no answer there. She’d done things she’d never have dreamed herself doing, but what choice had there been? Little by little the state she worked for had ceased to be the German Republic of old, and become a monstrous ogre, as disfigured as the war-disabled beggars on Berlin’s streets or the man they had cast into the Spree.
   It seemed unlikely his death would be linked back to Fritze. Charly was doing everything in her power to keep the boy off the streets and give him a future. She had enrolled him at the parish school on Bleibtreustrasse for the start of the new session. For the time being Friedrich Thormann had a home again. He repaid their kindness by being busier around the house than their cleaner, Lina, and more solicitous with the dog. So much that she feared Gereon might grow jealous.
   Dusk was falling as they drove into Freienwalde, a pretty little town shaped by its cure industry and the many villas and country houses which had sprung up in the last half century. Reaching one such house on the outskirts, part of a hidden street that meandered its way slowly uphill, Gereon stopped.‘This must be it,’ he said, parked and got out.
   The house overlooked the street like a small castle; an English-style villa built just before the war when all was right with the world and no one imagined the horrors in store. The place radiated innocent assurance, but looked different close up. The walled estate was sealed by a wrought-iron gate, behind which two men stood guard. Neither elegant clothes nor good manners could disguise that they were goons.
   ‘Fräulein Ritter, Herr Rath,’ one said, lifting his hat. ‘We’ve been expecting you.’ His partner opened a side-gate. On each of the property’s balconies stood a man with a carbine in his hand. Gereon was right, Hannah was safer here than anywhere. They made their way up the gravel path, escorted by one of the guards.
   ‘Marlow’s nervous,’ Gereon whispered. ‘His rivals, the Nordpiraten, have made a pact with the Berlin SA.’
   Charly asked herself how Gereon knew such things. It was rare for Homicide to deal with the Ringvereine. On the stoop was a man who wore neither coat nor hat, but light-coloured linen slacks, a shirt and tie, and a cardigan.‘Fräulein Ritter, I presume,’ he said, stretching out a hand. ‘Johann Marlow, delighted to meet you.’
   ‘The pleasure’s mine,’ Charly said, shaking his hand and immediately vexed by her friendliness. His charm had caught her off guard. He wasn’t especially good-looking, perhaps ten years older than Gereon, heavy-set with thinning hair, and, it seemed, unshakeable inner confidence.
   ‘How’s the girl?’ she asked.
   ‘Moving in the right direction after severe blood loss, and eating well. We’ve managed to put a little meat on her bones.’
   ‘But?’
   ‘She’s still in a state of shock. She hasn’t said a word since she arrived.’
   Charly sighed. Here we go again. Yet, if she’d understood Fritze correctly, Hannah was perfectly capable of speech. In Dalldorf her silence had been a denial of her surroundings, now the same thing was happening here.
   Marlow led them to a wing of the house where the entrance was also guarded. How could Hannah trust anyone in a place like this?
   ‘She’s in here,’ Marlow said, stopping outside a door. Yet another armed guard stood to greet him. ‘As you can see, she’s being well looked after.’
   ‘I’d like to speak to her alone if I may. I fear all you men are making her nervous.’
   82
   Rath was glad to speak with Johann Marlow in private, relieved that Charly’s first meeting with him had gone off without incident. She had spoken to Dr M. like a mother to a surgeon discussing her daughter’s treatment, and shown greater respect than he, Gereon Rath, had ever mustered. He hated himself for being so dependent on the man. If, years ago, someone had offered him their informal pact, but with full knowledge of the consequences, he’d have respectfully declined. Slowly but surely he had become so mixed up in Marlow’s business that he could no longer see a way out.
   ‘Thank you for looking after the girl,’ he said.
   For the first time he felt something like genuine gratitude. All the other‘services’ Dr M. had provided – hand-outs, information, even an overnight car-repair – had felt like tying chains around his wrists.
   ‘It’s nothing,’ Marlow said. ‘I don’t know why you’re hiding her, but she’s safe here.’
   ‘Your house is better guarded than a prison.’
   ‘With the crucial difference that my men make sure no one getsin.’
   ‘What are you so afraid of?’
   Marlow’s smile vanished. ‘I’ve already mentioned how the Nordpiraten are causing problems. Lapke has joined the Nazis, or at least the SA, and is making life tricky for us.’
   ‘Join the party yourself, and the SA will leave you in peace.’
   ‘The NSDAP? Like all those good citizens who can’t wait to sign up? Who claim they’vealways been Nazis? If there’s one thing I’ve never been, it’s a good citizen!’
   Marlow led him into a wood-panelled library. An MP 18 leaned against the wall next to a man in a chair, leafing through a crime novel. Bookshelves reached to the ceiling, all of them full. Most likely Marlow had bought them with the house. In the middle of the room armchairs were grouped around a table; a desk by the window looked onto the garden. Behind it a man with an eye patch sat playing patience.
   ‘Leo wanted to thank you, Inspector.’
   Leopold Juretzka stood and extended his hand.‘Usually I don’t talk to cops,’ he said, ‘but for you I’ll make an exception.’
   ‘That’s your mistake right there, Leo,’ Marlow said. ‘You can’t haveenough police friends.’
   Leo gestured to his eye patch.‘Your pig friends couldn’t prevent this.’
   ‘Without mypig friend – excuse the expression, Inspector – the SA would have beaten you to death.’
   Juretzka shrugged.‘Then… thank you, Inspector.’
   Rath gazed into the Ringverein man’s remaining eye. Had he really saddled himself with the Wosniak investigation to pry this ungrateful bastard free from the SA? It seemed his good turn had failed to win him a friend. Did the actions of the SA Field Police make Rath, as a serving officer, guilty by association? Juretzka let go ofhis hand and left.
   ‘Sorry, Inspector,’ Marlow said. ‘Leo hasn’t been the same since his release.’ He opened a box of cigars and offered one to Rath, who declined.
   ‘So,’ said Rath, ‘the SA are putting the squeeze on Berolina at the behest of the Nordpiraten?’
   Marlow puffed on his cigar.‘Not just us. Concordia must also suffer this misfortune.’
   ‘Polish-Paule,’ Rath recalled. Six months ago, Paul Marczewski had helped arrest a black sheep on the force, a police inspector killing off unwanted competition on behalf of the Nordpiraten chief. Lapke eliminating his enemies with the help of the state was nothing new.
   ‘Marczewski went to ground just in time,’ Marlow said. ‘I don’t know where he is, and I’m taking that as a good sign. Even so, Concordia are temporarily missing their leader, and some of Marczewski’s men have gone across to the Pirates.’
   ‘What about Berolina?’
   ‘They’ve had similar problems since the SA arrested Leo. It hasn’t impacted too much on my business, most of which is no longer conducted through Berolina. I doubt Lapke is aware of even half of my revenue streams.’
   ‘A proportion that might have increased had Leo talked?’
   Marlow hunched his shoulders.‘Leo doesn’t know everything, just a damn sight more than Lapke.’
   ‘Which is why you’re holding him here.’
   Marlow looked onto the garden.‘I bought this place about a year ago. Far from Berlin and its distractions, yet close enough if my presence is required.’ He drew on his cigar. ‘A lot of rich Berlin Jews spend their summer holidays here, which keeps the local SA occupied. They’re happy to leave us be for now.’
   ‘You plan to stay away a long time?’
   ‘This is a good place to wait and see how things settle.’
   ‘You think they will?’
   ‘Lapke can’t have the upper hand for ever.’
   ‘Why are you telling me this?’
   ‘To keep you informed. It’s always good to know who your friends are. And your enemies.’
   ‘You don’t have many friends left.’
   ‘The speed of change has caught me by surprise, but the Nazis are interested in certain things I can provide.’
   ‘What if they prefer to get these things from Lapke and the Nordpiraten?’
   ‘The Nordpiraten are the only Ringverein that isn’t being harrassed by the SA, but the Nazis don’t need a Ringverein to do their deals, they just need the right people. My people. Lapke’s doing everything he can to win them over to his side, so far without success.’
   ‘Everything he can includes depriving men like Juretzka of an eye?’
   ‘The SA isn’t the only force in the new Germany. Believe me when I say that Lapke is backing the wrong horse.’
   ‘Him and the rest of the country.’
   Marlow laughed.‘You could be right, Inspector. The real question is: how long will Lapke’s horse be in the running?’
   83
   Hannah knew something was different. Clip, clop, the sound of a woman’s shoes. Not one of the men who came by with food, nor the one she knew as the doctor, who checked her wounds, listened to her heart with the stethoscope, and oversaw her medication.
   The men treated her well, but she didn’t know who they were or what they wanted, and could only vaguely remember how she got here. Huckebein, who had ambushed her in that godforsaken rear courtyard. Felix, who had betrayed her. Then darkness. Fritze, who had appeared like her guardian angel, and with whom she had dragged herself to the old cinema, to her refuge behind the organ pipes. After that, nothing, but the face of a Chinese man who appeared in her dreams and whose gaze was somehow both distant and kind at the same time.
   At some point she wakened in brightness, saw the doctor sitting alongside her, and feared for a moment that she was in hospital or, worse, Dalldorf, but the doctor wore a suit and the room was more like a princess’s bedchamber than a hospital ward. Through the window she saw bare treetops. Were they somewhere in the Grunewald?
   The doctor had spoken to her but her tongue was tied and she remained silent. She felt relieved to be here, in this soft bed, for the chance to recover, but was troubled by an indeterminate fear. Two other men in the room gazed at her impassively. She had seen the same look in the Crow’s Nest: this mercilessness, as if something had sucked the souls from their bodies. These men were no different, just better dressed, and with good manners.
   She hadn’t once seen any women, and was curious about who was approaching her room in stiletto heels. One voice was high-pitched, two others low. When the handle was pushed down, nervous anticipation toppled inside her like a house of cards. It was the policewoman who had shown her the image of Kartoffelwith those awful burns, who had produced a photo of her father and shoved it under her nose. She gave a friendly smile and stepped towards the bed.
   ‘Hello, Hannah. I’m glad you’re feeling better.’
   Hannah sat up but said nothing. She hadn’t spoken with the men, and she wouldn’t speak with the policewoman either. It wasn’t a conscious choice, she just couldn’t.
   The woman sat next to the bed.‘I’m a police officer. My name is Charlotte Ritter. I visited you in Dalldorf. You remember, don’t you? Today I’m here because I want you to know that the man who was trying to kill you is dead. He can’t hurt you anymore.’
   Hannah felt a giant lump in her throat.
   ‘I need to hear something from you,’ the woman continued. ‘Something only you can tell me. Why did this man want to kill you? You knew him from the Crow’s Nest, didn’t you? Did he abuse you? Can you tell me his name?’
   She could scarcely breathe.Don’t panic, she told herself.
   The woman sighed and smiled at the same time, very friendly and patient.‘Fritze sends his regards,’ she said at last. ‘He’s doing well, he…’
   ‘Fritze!’ Hannah didn’t know where the word came from. It was the first thing she’d said in four days, her voice a husk. The woman seemed delighted.
   ‘That’s right. Fritze. He called for help, you weren’t doing so well, you were badly injured. We…’
   ‘Fritze,’ was the only thing she could say.
   The woman laid her hand on the cover.‘It’s all right. I’ll get your friend. Just be patient, and he’ll be here.’
   84
   Rath drove until the tank was almost empty, then made for a petrol station. After tailing the sun for hours it had finally shaken him off at Königslutter, and was now no more than a blood-red strip on the horizon. The petrol station lights were on but he was the sole customer. ‘Fill her up, please. The spare can too, while you’re at it.’
   As the attendant went about his instructions, he stretched his legs and searched for the toilet, splashing water on his face before stepping back into the dusk. Passing the shop window his gaze fell on a familiar logo.‘You have Afri-Cola here?’ he asked the attendant, who was cleaning the windscreen.
   He bought three bottles. Back on the road, he opened the first before rejoining the traffic. It was too sweet for his liking, but it kept you awake, and he had a long drive ahead.
   He had told Charly what he was planning days ago, yet she had made trouble all the same.‘After everything that happened yesterday I thought you’d understand that we were heading back out to Freienwalde today. She spoke; Hannah spoke about Fritze.’
   ‘And I thought I’d explained this is something I can only do at the weekend.’
   ‘With Fritze there, we can get Hannah to talk!’
   ‘We can do that just as well tomorrow or the next day.’
   ‘As if you’ll be back tomorrow.’
   He had shaken his head and set off. It was his car. Let her take the train if she was in such a hurry. Loath as he was to admit it, he was looking forward to getting away from Carmerstrasse for a couple of days. Since Fritze had reappeared, being at home no longer held the same appeal. Everything revolved around the boy. A few times now he had stayed on in the office, and it wasn’t because he needed to work late. Even so, he still hadn’t managed to close the Rothstein suicide, which ought to have been routine. He had requested Saturday off nonetheless, mumbling something about marriage preparations, and with all the overtime he had accrued Buddha was in no position to turn him down.
   At the start of the week he had been afraid Homicide might still be called out to investigate a corpse, at the Mühlendamm Lock or wherever else the Spree saw fit to wash up its dead, but with each day that passed he felt more at ease.
   Despite knowing that Gräf and Steinke were chasing a killer who was resting at the bottom of the Spree, he continued to devote more time to the Alberich case than his own. The same was true of Charly, or else why was she so desperate for Hannah Singer to talk? He doubted whether they’d get much sense out of the girl but, like him, Charly wouldn’t let go until they knew whose body they had pushed into the river. What kind of person he was. Why he had been out for Hannah. Why he had killed three men. Above all,who he was. Benjamin Engel? Gerhard Krumbiegel?
   Over the past few days he and Charly had asked themselves repeatedly whether Engel and Krumbiegel might not be one and the same but, whatever possibilities they played over, they always found some objection.
   The Bonn officers shadowing Eva Heinen didn’t know that Rath had been taken off the case, so he continued to speak with them on the telephone, passing on their written reports to Gräf when, two days later, they arrived in the Castle’s official mail.
   Gräf had carved out a space for himself and Steinke in the main office. They had made little progress in their first week on the Alberich case, which was hardly surprising but which pleased Rath all the same. Sometimes it pained him to see Gräf at morning briefing, and he would think back to the old days, to shared evenings in the Nasse Dreieck; shared investigations, more often than not in defiance of Wilhelm Böhm and service regulations… Those days would never return.
   He had known from the start that Eva Heinen wasn’t telling the full story, but it was only after re-reading the reports that he’d decided to head back west. He was growing tired but, whenever fatigue threatened to overcome him he drank another bottle of Afri-Cola. It was after midnight when he parked the Buick on a dirt track and finally yielded. His Cola supplies were finished, his cigarettes running out, and his eyes threatened to close. No sooner had he nodded off, however, than he was wakened by a downpour drumming against the roof and windscreen. Looking at his watch he saw that two hours had passed. It would have to do.
   He smoked a cigarette and started the engine. Only three left, to be rationed over the next few hours. It was no fun driving in this weather but he couldn’t risk being late. Reaching the Bergisches Land around half past six, the rain behind him with the rising sun, he felt bone weary. He stopped to pee but what he really needed was coffee, wishful thinking in a rural wasteland such as this.
   Away from the road he found a stream and splashed ice-cold water on his face. After running his wet hands through his hair, he plopped himself in front of the car mirror and parted it with a comb. If you ignored the rumpled suit and five o’clock shadow, he looked almost respectable.
   An hour later he reached his destination, a car park built for day-trippers from nearby towns. This must be the place his Bonn colleagues had described. He had telephoned yesterday specifically to ask, using his credentials as a former Cologne boy to feign local knowledge, and extract a few details that weren’t contained in the reports.
   Turning in the car park he concealed the Buick with the Berlin registration in a farm track leading downhill, and returned on foot. The clouds were gathering, but it was a pleasant enough morning. He looked at his watch. Another half hour or so. He crossed the car park and followed the narrow track into the forest. Reaching a clearing moments later, he knew instinctively this was the place. Through leafless branches he looked across a decommissioned quarry into the Rhine Valley and towards Bonn. On the edge of the precipice was an old beech tree with shimmering grey-green bark, between the roots of which the forest soil was brightly flecked. Stones, Rath realised as he crouched, little pebbles from the banks of the Rhine that someone had discarded here. He took one in his hand and laid it back down. Taking up position behind a rock, he smoked his last Overstolz and waited.
   He had just stubbed out his cigarette on the damp rock when he heard the sound of an engine, a deep drone that could easily belong to a Mercedes, the crunch of gravel in the car park, and the clank of a Prussian Police Opel. Though the police car continued uphill, Rath was certain his colleagues would stop behind the next curve and observe the parking lot. They had never followed Eva Heinen into the forest, but, with Prussian meticulousness, merely recorded the time she exited and – usually a quarter of an hour later – returned to her vehicle.
   Morning stroll the observation reports noted, nothing more, then the time, varying by four or five minutes at the most. Unlike Rath, the officers from Bonn had failed to take a closer look at the site, most likely because they were locals and knew the track led only to a decommissioned quarry, and because they couldn’t imagine the forest was suitable for anything other than a brief stroll.
   Still, at some point the regularity of Eva Heinen’s dawn excursions had got Rath thinking, and now here he was.
   The Mercedes puttered in neutral, then the engine was switched off. Moments later there was a crackle in the undergrowth, and a well dressed Eva Heinen approached with slow, measured steps to stop in front of the tree with the pebble stones. She stood with her back to him, lost in thought. It was almost as if she were praying, which perhaps she was. Reaching inside her coat pocket, she fetched a small white stone and placed it alongside the many others on the ground.
   He felt curiously moved. A spirit of reverence seemed to have gripped the forest. He stepped out and cleared his throat. Her eyes filled with icy fury when she recognised him.
   ‘I didn’t mean to startle you.’
   ‘What are you doing here?’
   ‘Not so loud, or my colleagues from Bonn will realise you’re talking to someone. In the last few weeks they’ve been happy to wait in the car. It would be a shame if today was the day that changed.’
   ‘I’m being watched?’
   ‘You’re surprised?’
   ‘Your colleagues from Bonn don’t know you’re here?’
   ‘To be perfectly honest, my colleagues from Berlin don’t know I’m here either.’ He looked around. ‘Nice spot, this. Of the Siebengebirge I know only the Drachenfels.’
   ‘The Ennert hills are part of a different range.’
   ‘Oh? Well, it’s a great view, anyway. That’s Bonn down there, isn’t it?’
   ‘What do you want?
   ‘The truth.’
   ‘I told you everything I know three weeks ago.’ She avoided his gaze.
   ‘At first I thought you were meeting him,’ he said, ‘but now I understand why you come here every morning. He’s really dead, isn’t he?’ Rath pointed towards the tree. ‘You buried him there.’
   Eva Heinen nodded. It felt like a surrender.
   ‘Why did you bury an empty coffin nine years ago? Because your husband wanted a Jewish grave, and you couldn’t do that to your strict, Catholic family?’
   ‘No,’ she said. ‘Edith has converted to the Mosaic faith and her grandparents haven’t disowned her.’
   ‘Then why a Jewish grave?’
   ‘It isn’t a Jewish grave, it’s just his final resting place. He wanted us to bury him here, in the forest. Without a headstone.’
   ‘But it’s a Jewish custom to lay stones on the deceased’s grave.’
   ‘I like the custom, and I didn’t want to lay flowers. No one can know a man is buried here. It’s illegal to bury people in the wild, as you are no doubt aware.’
   ‘You still haven’t answered my question. Why all the fuss at the cemetery nine years ago?’
   ‘Because my husband was still alive when we lowered the empty coffin into the ground.’
   ‘He was still alive when you had him declared dead?’ Eva Heinen nodded. ‘Then when did you bury him here?’
   ‘Four years, seven months and five days ago,’ she said. He thought he saw tears.
   Achim von Roddeck was right to suspect Benjamin Engel had survived the war, butnot that he had threatened him and slain his most loyal men.
   ‘Why didn’t you say he had survived?’.
   ‘Because Benjamin wouldn’t have wanted it.’
   ‘Sounds like you have a lot more to tell me.’
   ‘Why should I tell you anything? Walther wrote to say you were at the university. That you suspecthim of killing these men.’
   ‘I don’t suspect your son.’
   ‘That’s not the way he tells it.’
   ‘Meantime I know who did it. I just don’t understand why.’
   ‘You think I can help you?’
   ‘I think you can help me get closer to the truth.’
   ‘I have to go back to Bonn, Inspector. I’m needed in the store.’
   ‘I’ve driven hundreds of kilometres to speak to you.’
   ‘No one asked you to come, not even your own superiors. I don’t know why you’re here.’
   ‘Because I can’t stand back and watch while our commissioner confuses an anti-Semitic witch-hunt with a police investigation. And because I want to know what really happened.’
   Eva Heinen looked surprised by his honesty.‘Do you know Bonn?’ she asked.
   ‘I’m from Cologne.’
   ‘Then be at the Rheinisches Möbelhaus on Brückenstrasse at ten. On the left-hand side as you approach from the Beuler Bridge, you can’t miss it…’
   With that she turned and hurried back to the parking lot.
   He listened for the noises of two engines, the sonorous drone of the Mercedes and the clank of the police Opel that followed. He didn’t have any Overstolz left, but waited for what he guessed was the length of a cigarette before making his way back.
   85
   They had washed the dishes together after breakfast. Fritze took Kirie for a walk while Charly read her book. Two pages in, the doorbell rang. She sighed and stood up. That wasn’t much of a walk, she thought. Had he already given up on his chores? He was only a kid; she shouldn’t impose stricter standards because he had lived on the street.
   She opened the door, ready to issue a few stern words and send him on his way, only to find Karin van Almsick grinning awkwardly, with a box of chocolates and a large brown envelope tucked under her arm.‘I didn’t mean to disturb, just to see how you were.’ She handed Charly the chocolates.
   ‘Thank you, but there’s really no need.’ Charly felt thrown by the surprise visit.
   ‘It’s from all of us,’ Karin said. ‘Everyone sends best wishes, including Superintendent Wieking.’
   ‘Thank you,’ Charly stammered. Karin came as if from another world, reminding her of everything that had happened in the last few days. Those things that no one could ever know. She had thrown a corpse into the Spree instead of informing Gennat, concealed a wanted killer and escaped lunatic, visited the notorious underworld boss Johann Marlow and enlisted his aid… and, of course, she wasn’t the slightest bit ill and had spent the last few days gadding blithely around town. She felt her conscience breathing down her neck, an ugly little monkey that refused to be shaken off.
   ‘Can I come in?’ Karin asked, having already taken a step inside and started nosing around.
   ‘I… I was just on the sofa.’ A chance look in the wardrobe mirror revealed an idiot grin.
   Karin hung up her coat and gazed around the living room. She whistled through her teeth.‘Nice place.’
   ‘Gereon inherited a little money.’ It sounded almost like an apology. She adopted a long-suffering face to go with her supposed condition.
   ‘Is there anything I can do?’ Karin asked. ‘On you go, lie down, and I’ll make us tea.’
   ‘That’s not necessary, thank you. I haven’t lost the use of my arms.’
   ‘Is the kitchen through here?’
   Charly nodded weakly and left Karin to it. She lay on the sofa with a wet flannel on her head until, a few minutes later, Karin emerged with a tray, two teacups and a pot. She pressed the flannel to her forehead.‘What brings you to Charlottenburg?’
   ‘You, silly!’ Karin gave her a sympathetic look. ‘Everyone in the department’s rooting for you. We hope you’ll be back soon.’
   ‘What are you working on? Any Communist gangs still out there, or have we locked ’em all up?’
   Karin van Almsick had never understood irony.‘Don’t worry,’ she said, ‘there’ll be plenty to do when you get back. It was all just too much, all that overtime, and then the wedding. I saw it coming, you know.’
   ‘The doctor says rest is the most important thing.’ Charly was starting to feel like her grandmother, discussing her various aches and pains over coffee with friends.
   ‘Tea can work wonders too!’
   Charly set the flannel on an armrest.
   After pouring the tea Karin pointed to the envelope.‘There’s post for you.’ She looked at the envelope and read: ‘A Division, Fräulein Ritter, confidential, Police Headquarters Berlin, Alexanderplatz 2-6.’
   ‘A Division, and it wound up with you?’
   ‘A stray, from Halle. You know what these provincials are like, always getting things mixed up.’
   ‘I did make a telephone call for Gereon, last week or the week before, when we were about to go for lunch. Perhaps our friend in Halle got the wrong end of the stick.’
   ‘You can give it to him when he gets back. Where is he, anyway?’
   Exactly the question Charly had feared. The whole department was curious about Gereon, partly because they so rarely set eyes on him in G.
   ‘Visiting family. Wedding stuff.’ She touched her temple. ‘I ought to be there too, but I couldn’t, not like this.’
   ‘You poor thing.’
   The doorbell rang.
   ‘That’ll be Fritze,’ Charly said and stood up.
   ‘Who?’
   ‘A boy… from the neighbourhood. He’s been looking after the dog while I’ve been sick.’
   Charly went into the hall and almost before she could open the door Kirie had slipped past her. Nothing was more urgent than settling into her basket.
   ‘You wouldn’t believe the number of Jewish shops,’ Fritze said, removing his scarf. ‘There are SA officers outside half the Ku’damm.’
   ‘Fritze, this my colleague, Fräulein van Almsick,’ Charly said, exaggeratedly, so he realised they weren’t alone.
   ‘It’s just Almsick,’ Karin said, extending a hand. ‘Forget thevan.’
   ‘Pleased to meet you,’ Fritze made a perfect bow. ‘Friedrich von Thormann,’ he said and winked. ‘Forget thevon.’
   It was all Charly could do not to laugh. She hoped the word‘colleague’ would make Fritze think twice about shooting his mouth off, but he seemed to have other things on his mind. ‘Did you know that Goebbels is planning is to expel all those with Dutch heritage from the public sector? Because of this van Lubbe.’
   ‘You mean vander Lubbe?’ Karin asked, making a horrified face.
   ‘That’s right, van der Lubbe. All those withvan in their names are being laid off.’
   ‘Really?’
   Fritze nodded seriously.‘Something about a fire risk. Unless they’re non-smokers of course, in which case they can stay.’
   ‘That can’t be right,’ Karin cupped her hand over her mouth.
   ‘Ha! Got you!’ Fritze beamed. ‘April fool!’
   Charly had to smile. The boy had been at it all morning.
   Karin van Almsick wasn’t in the mood for jokes. ‘Is that the time?’ she said,before turning to check the clock on the wall.‘I have to go. Our colleagues will be wondering where I am.’ She took her coat from the stand, threw Fritze a hurt expression, shouldered her bag and opened the door. ‘Get well soon, Charly.’
   ‘Did I scare her off?’ Fritze asked.
   ‘It’s fine. She was starting to get on my nerves. Wouldn’t like to think of how many cupboards and drawers she stuck her nose inside while she was making the tea.’
   ‘Then you’d be glad of a little time on your own, Aunt Charly?’
   She had grown accustomed to being Aunt Charly. As if he really were the poor orphan child of her – completely fictional – sister from Zehdenick.
   ‘Well, Ihad only just sat down when the doorbell rang.’
   ‘It’s just… I wouldn’t mind heading out for a bit by myself.’
   ‘Of course.’
   She realised they’d been together for more or less the entire week, at home, visiting local authorities, even walking Kirie. No wonder the boy needed a little space.
   She heard the door click shut, then the clatter of footsteps and felt almost as if it were her own child heading out to play.
   With Fritze gone, her eye fell on the brown envelope. Post from Halle. The Criminal Record Office. It was a good thing they hadn’t opened it in G. There’d be trouble if it became known that she’d been assisting with a Homicide case in Gereon’s office.
   Dear Fräulein Ritter, she read,following our telephone conversation of the twenty-first of this month, I hereby enclose all relevant documents pertaining to one Krumbiegel, Gerhard.
   Petzold had taken his time, but proved more thorough than she had anticipated following their brief conversation, which, after a series of abortive attempts, had finally come about on the Day of Potsdam. The man from Halle had sent on everything, not just the police files. Even a photo!
   The aforementioned Krumbiegel was involved in a barroom brawl in’16, whereupon he was fingerprinted and photographed, making it possible, on this occasion, to enclose his negative.
   The image was attached by paperclip. A standard police photo, taken from three sides, dull gaze, bitter expression. No doubt the poor bastard would have preferred jail to another stint on the Front.
   Charly could hardly believe it. She recognised this man gazing into the camera as though he were drunk, which he probably was, having been picked up following a brawl while on army leave. He wasn’t yet disfigured or scarred, but his features left her in no doubt.
   It couldn’t be…
   … yet no matter how she spun it, the explanation was always the same. It shed new light on the Alberich case, not to mention the man they had cast into the Spree.
   86
   Rath hadn’t parked outside the furniture store, but a little out of the way on Friedensplatz. Just after ten, he saw the image of the green Opel reflected in the display window and congratulated himself on a good decision. His colleagues were taking their work seriously. Despite never having met them in person Rath pulled his hat a little lower over his forehead.
   You really couldn’t miss the Rheinisches Möbelhaus with its brand new signboards and neon letters. Outside a shop a troop of brown-uniformed SA officers were glueing posters.
   The doorbell rang as he entered the store. Staff were consulting with clients in hushed tones. He felt almost as if he were in a library. It didn’t take long for someone to approach. Management was on the first floor.
   The assistant led him up a dark, wood-panelled staircase, through dark, wood-panelled corridors and an atmosphere of sedate respectability. Eva Heinen’s office, smaller than anticipated, but likewise dark and wood-panelled, exuded the same quality. Two windows faced onto Brückenstrasse and a huge swastika that served to evoke the new age. He didn’t like it but couldn’t get worked up in the same way as Charly. Her outrage when, with a single stroke of his pen, Hindenburg had outlawed the red-black-and-gold of the Republic! TheJew flag orflag of the November criminals, as it was known, and not just by Nazis. For Rath the German colours had always been black-white-and-red. What he couldn’t understand was Hindenburg’s decision to accord the swastika the same status as the imperial flag.
   ‘Take a seat, Inspector,’ Eva Heinen said, once the assistant had closed the door. Rath kept his distance from the window, thinking of the green Opel on the other side of the road. ‘You’ve gone to a lot of trouble to reach me.’
   ‘Let’s hope it’s worth it.’ He took out his cigarette case, having replenished his stocks on Friedensplatz. ‘Do you mind?’
   ‘Go ahead.’
   ‘Already I’ve learned how your husband survived the war.’
   ‘He didn’t.’
   ‘I’m sorry, I thought…’
   ‘Benjamin is just as much a victim of war as those to whom we erect monuments and dedicate speeches. No one thinks of theliving dead who returned; they get in the way of our hard-won rhetoric of valour and sacrifice.’ Surprised by her own anger, she lowered her voice and continued. ‘Benjamin survived the explosion, yes. But in reality it only prolonged his death. It took ten years for the shrapnel to find its way to his heart.’
   ‘That’s how he died?’ Rath couldn’t conceal his surprise. ‘Did you realise he was doomed? Is that why you told your children their father had been killed in action?’
   ‘I thought Benjaminwas dead, for years. It was only for the children’s sake that I kept up the vague hope he might still be alive. I tried to carry on the store as he would have wished and, despite some lean years immediately after the war, business was good. Then came the inflation. What can I say? I had just been forced to sell the family home, and was about toput the proceeds back into the store when it happened. Bankruptcy seemed only a question of time.’
   Eva Heinen looked out of the window, as if at the past.‘It was my husband that saved us,’ she continued. ‘I don’t know how he learned of our troubles. It was as if he had been watching over us all that time, like a… guardian angel.’
   Schutzengel. Todesengel. For Eva Heinen he was a guardian; for Roddeck an angel of death.
   ‘Did he make contact with you?’
   ‘Yes. He donated a large sum of money, which allowed me to refloat the company and buy back the house in Gronau. The family home was the most important thing for the children.’
   ‘You’re telling me thatyears after the war, your husband simply waltzed in, placed a large suitcase of money on the table and went on his way?’
   ‘In all those years, I never saw my husband face-to-face.’ Rath looked at her in disbelief. ‘He didn’t want me to. He didn’t want anyone apart from me to know he was still alive.’
   ‘I don’t understand. Why weren’t you allowed to see him?’
   ‘So I could remember him as he was, before war got in the way.’
   ‘Was he so badly disfigured?’
   ‘I don’t know, Inspector. Christmas 1916. The photographs with him and the children under the tree are etched forever in my mind.’
   She leaned forward and opened a drawer in her desk, placing a mask on the table. A half mask, the right side of a face, to be precise.
   ‘That’s… your husband,’ Rath said.
   ‘His prosthetic face. It’s all I have of him. Sometimes I look at it and try to imagine how he looked after the war.’
   It was a good piece of work. Propped up by a pair of spectacles the right eye seemed almost real. Rath got the feeling that Benjamin Engel was looking at him with an expression of mild reproach. Eva Heinen replaced the prosthesis and closed the drawer.
   He cleared his throat.‘There’s one thing I still don’t understand. Why, no sooner than you learned that against all expectations your husband had survived the war, did you have him declared dead?’
   ‘He was the one who requested I stage that farce of a burial, despite knowing how it would hurt the children. He insisted: Benjamin Engel was to be laid to rest.’
   ‘Why?’
   ‘He said it was better if Engel Furniture could no longer be linked back to him. It was also his wish that I revert to my maiden name; that the store itself be renamed. I think,’ Eva Heinen gestured towards the swastika flag outside, ‘it was because of that.’
   ‘In ’24? No one could have guessed…’
   ‘Nazis aren’t a pre-requisite for anti-Semitism, believe me. Neither, for that matter, are Jews. Benjamin was Catholic, but in the army he was always regarded as a Jew. I think his experiences in the war opened his eyes to the fact that someone like him would never be allowed to belong. Not even if he was baptised; not even if he risked his life for the Fatherland.’
   ‘So that explains the name: Rheinisches Möbelhaus.’
   ‘The name paved the way for our expansion across Bonn. Today you’ll find us in an additional four cities.’
   ‘He justgave you the money?’
   ‘It was a complicated business, I don’t want to go into detail, but essentially, yes.’
   ‘What made it so complicated? The fact that it wasn’t money but gold?’
   A startled look passed across her eyes.‘What makes you say that?’
   ‘I’ve spoken to the demolition expert from back then. The soldiers who hid the gold, most of whom are now dead, were planning to retrieve the spoils in summer ’24. By the time they got there it was gone.’
   ‘I don’t know what you’re talking about.’ Suddenly she seemed very tense.
   ‘Listen, I’m not interested in who pinched the gold; the only thing I’m interested in is why a veteran should kill three of his former comrades so many years after the war.’
   ‘Benjamin didn’t kill anyone. He was looking out for his family.’
   ‘Are you certain it was him? Did you recognise his voice?’
   ‘We never spoke on the telephone. We wrote to each other, and it was his handwriting. No doubt about it. Besides, he knew things only Benjamin could know.’ She blushed slightly.
   ‘Letters, but he didn’t use the Reichspost?’
   ‘Of course not. He didn’t want to reveal anything about himself, not even his address.’
   ‘Do you still have these letters?’ She looked so horrified that Rath knew it was pointless to request them. ‘Then you used a middleman. Who?’
   ‘I can’t say.’
   ‘Was it the same man you sent to France?’
   ‘Pardon me?’
   ‘Was it Franz Thelen?’
   ‘Who?’ She was even more startled than moments before.
   ‘Your husband’s driver during the war. After that he worked as a driver for your store.’
   ‘Our proxy, Herr Theobald, looks after that side of things.’
   ‘Don’t play games with me. You know Thelen. It was he who established contact with your husband, wasn’t it, and collected the gold from France?’
   ‘I think I’ve said enough.’ All of a sudden Eva Heinen was as tight-lipped as during their first encounter three weeks before.
   ‘One last question. Does the name Gerhard Krumbiegel mean anything to you?’
   By the way she looked at him, he knew she had no idea. With that, whatever hope he had of making sense of last Sunday vanished.
   ‘Is he your main suspect?’ Eva Heinen asked. ‘Do you think I hired someone to kill all these men?’
   ‘I don’t know, Frau Heinen. What I do know is you’re still not giving me the full story.’
   ‘That’s something you’ll just have to make peace with, Inspector.’
   There was a knock, and the bald-headed assistant who had shown Rath upstairs peered inside.‘Excuse the interruption, Frau Direktor.’
   ‘It’s all right, Schröter. Herr Rath was just leaving.’
   ‘It’s… perhaps you should come down.’
   ‘Why?’
   ‘It’s best if you come and see for yourself.’
   Rath followed her and the assistant downstairs. On the floor, customers and staff stood tightly packed, whispering to one another. Two brownshirts hovered in front of the display window. One unrolled a poster and set about pasting it to the door.
   Eva Heinen turned to Rath.‘Now you understand the reason for everything I’ve just told you,’ she said.
   She went outside, moving energetically, unafraid of the brown uniforms. Opening the glass door she almost knocked the SA man off balance. The brush slipped from his hand.
   ‘What’s all this?’ she asked. He swore under his breath and took out a handkerchief. It was the second SA man who answered her question. He held a cardboard sign in front of him, with three exclamation marks.
   Germans! Fight back! Don’t buy from Jews!
   ‘Don’t you read the papers,’ he said provocatively. ‘The boycott.’
   ‘This isn’t a Jewish store.’
   ‘Knock it off. Engel Furniture’s been here since I was in short trousers. It’s always been a Jew store.’
   ‘The Rheinisches Möbelhaus has absolutely nothing to do with Engel Furniture.’
   ‘No, it just sells the same furniture with the same assistants in the same stores?’
   Rath went outside. He was reluctant to cause a stir with the Opel parked opposite, but this Nazi with his cardboard sign was starting to grate.‘What you’re doing here is property damage,’ he said. ‘Illegal fly posting at least.’
   The poster on the door bore the same slogan.Germans! Fight back! Don’t buy from Jews! Imagination was not a Nazi strong point.
   The SA man was uncertain. No doubt it was the first time anyone had stood up to him. Soon enough, though, he was grinning. If things turned nasty, he could count on his mate.‘Get a load of this, Willi,’ he said to his friend, who was stowing his handkerchief. ‘A shyster who needs taking down a peg.’
   ‘I’m not a lawyer.’ Rath showed his badge and the man’s grin froze.
   The badge said only KRIMINALPOLIZEI, with no indication as to what city he was from. He went on the attack.‘I am a customer here, and can assure you the owner of this store is no Jew.’
   ‘But before…’
   ‘In the new Germany, we’re not interested in “before”! Haven’t you read the provisions? Central Committee has expressly decreed that businesses are only to be boycotted if it can be provenbeyond doubt that they are under Jewish ownership.’
   He had read something like that yesterday in the newspaper. Mentioning the word‘decree’ proved an inspired move, for suddenly the SA man stood to attention, comically with a cardboard sign in front of his chest.
   ‘Yes, Sir. Apologies. I was unaware tha…’
   ‘Stop talking. Focus on cleaning up this mess, and apologise to the lady.’
   The pair set to work. Rath took his leave with a tip of the hat and made his way back to the car before the men in the green Opel got it into their heads to intervene. A look through the display window confirmed that all was quiet again. His colleagues from Bonn continued to observe Eva Heinen, who looked on sternly as the SA men began removing their poster.
   Returning to Friedensplatz, it became clear that not everyone shared the former Engel Furniture store’s good fortune. Outside each store Rath passed, two or three SA officers were glueing the now familiar poster to display windows, some of which had also been painted with a Star of David. As yet no windows had been smashed. The Central Committee had explicitly spoken against property damage, buthad been unforthcoming when it came to the topic of bodily harm.
   The boycott was meant to be revenge for the so-called Jewish atrocity propaganda in the foreign press. Seeing these SA men with their chin-straps and stern faces, defacing display windows with ink and posters, Rath understood why things were being written about Germany’s new government. It was all so tasteless, so repulsive, so unworthy of the Fatherland. He was starting to realise what Charly meant when she said the Nazis had stolen the country she called home.
   Some pedestrians gazed to the side in embarrassment and occasional disapproval. Most looked the other way.
   Just then Rath saw a woman enter a clothing store in spite of the unwanted attention of two SA officers, and thought perhaps the old Germany was still alive after all. He would have liked to follow suit, if only to show that not all Germans went along with this Nazi bullshit, but he had made himself conspicuous enough already. It was a ladies’ clothing store anyway.
   Moments later he had renewed cause for doubt. Passing a shoe shop, a poster in the display window caught the eye immediately, adorned as it was with the black-white-and-red of the imperial German flag, in the middle of which was a swastika and the wordsChristian Enterprise. Underneath that:Buy German Goods from German Shops! Combat League for Middle-Class Employees and Artisans.
   How quickly the Christian middle-classes had realised there was profit to be made from the travails of their Jewish competition.
   87
   Winter returned on Sunday morning. Sleet that smelled of cold, high winds; foul weather. For the first time since being transferred to this house, into the care of these men whose motives were still unclear, and who might yet turn out to be cops, Hannah appreciated her warm confines. None of them had revealed much. Nor had she asked them. Try as she might she simply couldn’t get the words out.
   The pain in her side had been agonising, worse than that in her arm. They had given her morphine from an infusion bottle next to the bed. Hannah recognised old Sister M immediately. Only she had made her final days in the Crow’s Nest bearable. Before the fire that changed everything.
   She could barely remember it now, only the warmth of the flames on that bitterly cold December night. She’d set the shack on fire while high, she told the court. She was high, she said, and mad, but it wasn’t true. The fire had been an attempt to free herself. To deliver her once cheerful, carefree father from his suffering, this bitter cripple who had lost the most essential part of himself in the no-man’s-land between the trenches. She had sought to erase the nightmare years in the Crow’s Nest, in the hope of achieving some new future. Only to be packed off to the madhouse, where she had bust out and almost been killed.
   Now, with her strength returning, she started to consider her future again, making plans and thinking about her next move. The first thing was to get out of here.
   She could make it to the window without assistance and, on a few occasions, had struck out, pulling the infusion bottle behind her. The gardens were surrounded by a high wall, with armed men posted everywhere. The police officer from a few days ago was still the only woman she’d seen, but all her questions had achieved was to tighten the knot in Hannah’s tongue. She couldn’t talk about Huckebein and the Crows and everything the bastards had done to her, nor the approval of the man in whose crippled, morphine-addicted body her father had once resided. Her father who had gone permanently missing in action, and would never have allowed such things to occur.
   She was being held in a kind of fortress, better guarded than the sealed unit in Dalldorf. If her hunch was right, this was a criminal’s hideout.
   The doctor who never wore a white coat, the friendly but inscrutable man so adept with stab wounds, was none other than Johann Marlow. Never in her life had she imagined she’d see Dr M. in the flesh, and she’d spent the last few days racking her brains over what business this policewoman could have with him. He was no ordinary criminal, that was for sure. Compared with the misery of the Crow’s Nest, the tawdriness of begging and petty theft, this was a whole newworld; a world in which, contrary to popular belief, crime appeared to pay handsomely.
   Hearing the tottering sound of high-heeled shoes she knew she had visitors. As the footsteps turned into the corridor she heard low voices, and a knock. The door opened and Fritze peered cautiously inside. He took a few steps towards her bed.‘How are you?’ he asked.
   She took him in her arms and hugged him tight.‘Better,’ she rasped. ‘Better.’
   The knot in her tongue, the bung in her throat, were gone, and here was someone who wanted nothing from her but to be near.
   ‘I was worried you’d die,’ he said, when she let go.
   ‘Without you, I might have done. Was it you who brought me to this palace?’
   ‘Friends of mine.’
   ‘The house belongs to Dr M.’
   ‘Who?’
   ‘It doesn’t matter. Tell me about these friends.’
   ‘They’re cops, only different somehow. Nice. I’m living with them.’
   Hannah sat upright.‘Thecops had me brought here?’
   ‘Notthe cops. Two cops. I’m telling you, they’re different. They took care of everything. The man trying to strangle you was some killer.’
   Hannah felt her throat constricting.‘Huckebein.’
   ‘That’s not his name.’
   ‘In the Crow’s Nest he…’ She couldn’t carry on.
   ‘There’s no need to be afraid. He’s dead.’
   She reached for his hand, knowing what it meant to have killed someone. Several people. Even people you despised.
   ‘I just wanted him to stop,’ Fritze said. ‘I kept stabbing until he did.’
   ‘Let’s talk about something else. Do you know what the plan is?’
   ‘I’m to start school, they say.’
   ‘Who?’
   ‘My aunt Charly, and Gereon. The two cops.’
   ‘They’re sending you back into care?’
   ‘No, she gave her word. They’re looking for something else. A family or something.’
   ‘What about me?’
   She hadn’t meant to say it, but it came out with the tears she could no longer hold back. All of a sudden she felt more alone than ever before, and she had spent a hell of a lot of time feeling alone.
   Fritze shrugged.‘The main thing is to get yourself healthy again.’
   ‘Iam healthy.’
   ‘Hannah, listen,’ he said. ‘Charly wants to ask you a few questions, and…’
   ‘I know,’ she interrupted, a little too sharply. ‘She’s been here already.’
   ‘I mean, don’t youwant to talk to her, she’s nice you know…’
   ‘Sometimes I just can’t. I want to, but I can’t.’
   He held her hand.‘I’ll stay with you if you like.’
   ‘I was wondering why she’s been outside all this time.’
   At that moment the door opened and the policewoman came in.
   Hannah didn’t understand. Moments ago she’d been talking a blue streak, but no sooner did she lay eyes on the woman than the lump in her throat returned.
   ‘Hello, Hannah,’ the woman said. Aunt Charly. ‘You look a lot better than the last time I saw you. How are you?’
   ‘Fine.’ She squeezed the word out.
   The woman sat by her bedside.‘I don’t want to push you, but there’s something I need to know about the man who was trying to kill you.’
   The lump in her throat grew bigger. The woman was talking about Huckebein. Why did everyone always want to talk abouthim? It was just like back in court.
   ‘Do you think we can manage?’ The woman smiled and said, ‘Listen, we’ll do it like this. I’ll ask my questions in such a way that you need only nod or shake your head.’
   Hannah nodded.
   ‘The man who was trying to kill you… his name is Heinrich Wosniak?’
   Yes.
   ‘When I showed you that photo in Dalldorf, of the corpse from Nollendorfplatz, you realised it wasn’t Wosniak, didn’t you?’
   Yes again. Answering like this made her feel almost euphoric.
   ‘You recognised Gerhard Krumbiegel, even while I spent the whole time talking about Wosniak.’
   Yes.
   ‘Did you realise Wosniak had killed Krumbiegel in order to fake his own death?’
   Hannah wasn’t sure if she’drealised anything that day, only that the name Wosniak meant Huckebein was back in Berlin, and that something couldn’t be right if Kartoffel had been found dead in Huckebein’s coat.
   ‘I’m certain that’s why he meant to kill you. Because you were a potential threat.’
   In truth she didn’t care why Huckebein meant to kill her, the main thing was that he no longer could.
   ‘One more question, then I’ll leave you both in peace,’ the woman said and fetched the photograph from her bag. ‘Do you know this man?’
   No.
   ‘His name is Achim von Roddeck. Perhaps you saw him with Wosniak, or he came to the Crow’s Nest…’
   ‘No,’ Hannah said, surprised by her own voice. She had never seen the blond, arrogant-looking prig in lieutenant’s uniform. Such a man could not have been in the Crow’s Nest. It had been others who dwelled there, former front soldiers who, time and again, had been thrust into battle by people like this lieutenant, and who, crippled emotionally and physically by the experience, had been condemned to beggarhood when the war came to an end.
   ‘Good,’ the policewoman said. ‘I suspect they didn’t make contact again until after the Crow’s Nest burned down. Perhaps it was the fire that told him his faithful Heinrich was also in Berlin…’
   As the woman reached the door Hannah managed to ask the question that had been on the tip of her tongue all this time.‘What’s going to happen to me?’
   ‘Don’t worry. You won’t be going anywhere near Dalldorf again. I won’t allow it.’
   She sounded so certain that Hannah believed her. Falling back on her pillow, she took Fritze’s hand and, for the first time in life, thought that, just maybe, everything was going to be all right.
   88
   Rath stood by the open patio door and watched Kirie romp around the wet garden with a big stick in her mouth. She brought it to Johann Marlow, who hurled it across the lawn for the game to begin again. Charly joined him to watch.
   ‘Did she talk?’ Rath asked.
   ‘After a fashion.’
   ‘And, is it Wosniak?’
   ‘Yes. He tried to kill her in Dalldorf, but she defended herself and fled. She recognised Krumbiegel from the crime scene photo and must have sensed something was up…’
   ‘Why didn’t she say at the time? She could have spared us a lot of hassle.’
   Charly looked at him reproachfully.‘Besides revenge for the fire, it could be the reason he wanted her dead. She was the only witness who could expose the fraud. Dalldorf was his first attempt. The second time, in town, she gave him the slip. The third time he was the one who copped it.’
   ‘Fine, but it doesn’t tell us why Wosniak killed his former comrades.’
   ‘Shame we can no longer hear his own take on the matter.’
   ‘Then perhaps we’ll get more out of the man who hired him.’
   ‘Roddeck?’
   ‘I’m almost certain he’s behind it. It all fits too well together. Whenever we begin to question his fanciful story about Engel, another dead body appears to back him up.’
   ‘Murder, in order to prove atheory? Well, that would be unusual. I wonder if Gennat’s come across that as a motive.’
   ‘I think it’s best we leave Gennat out of this.’
   She agreed, and Rath savoured their keeping a secret together. The only thing Charly had ever failed to share with Gennat was their engagement, but it hadn’t taken long for Buddha to find out.
   ‘Seriously though, perhaps he has something to hide and is ridding himself of troublesome witnesses.’
   ‘Hmm,’ Rath mumbled. ‘His old comrades, you mean? Who know a secret from the war?’
   ‘Precisely. Something that casts Roddeck in a negative light.’
   ‘Why eliminate them now?’
   ‘Perhaps there was a reason for them to be quiet, and this reason no longer exists. Something like that…’
   ‘This is fun. I’m beginning to understand why Gennat sets such great store by you.’
   ‘Beginning to understand?’
   ‘But for now it’s just speculation, and where does Krumbiegel’s murder fit into all this?’
   Charly had an answer to that one, too.‘An identity switch. Wosniak needed to disappear and, since his old friend had been equally badly disfigured in the Bülowplatz arson and had no next of kin, he made the perfect victim.’
   ‘Meanwhile Roddeck could pin it all on Engel, the murdering Jew, already blamed for the heinous excesses of Operation Alberich.’
   ‘Yes.’
   ‘Even if it was him, how are we ever going to prove it?’
   ‘I don’t think we can.’
   ‘We can prove that he lied in the morgue. We have Krumbiegel’s photograph.’
   ‘Pretty thin, don’t you think? He’ll worm his way out of it.’ Charly made a sceptical face. ‘The way I see it, we have nothing. At least, nothing we can use in court.’
   One of the guards signalled to Marlow from the library. Kirie trotted after the gangster as though she were his. The men discussed something briefly and looked over towards Rath and Charly before going inside.
   ‘We can’t pretend nothing’s happened,’ Rath said.
   ‘What do you have in mind?’
   ‘I don’t know, but we can’t simply stand by.’
   ‘I tell you now, there’s no way you’re dragging the kids into this.’
   ‘Nothing could be further from my mind. I just can’t bear to watch Achim von Roddeck make as if he’s the perfect fit for the new age, when really he’s a lying, murdering, arsehole.’
   ‘Maybe that’s why he’s such a good fit.’
   ‘Do you have to always make things political?’
   ‘Life is political. Everything we do is political.’
   ‘Everythingyou do. All I want is to make sure killers don’t go free.’
   ‘That’s just it. Once you’ve set your mind on something you can’t help yourself, and hang the consequences. You’re taking this business with Roddeck too personally. You takeeverything too personally!’
   ‘That’s the reason I became a police officer,’ he said. ‘Yes, I take it personally when someone commits murder, or incites others, and thinks he can get away with it. It’s the getting away with it I can’t stand.’
   ‘Our killer’s dead,’ said Charly. ‘He won’t be murdering anyone else and, if I’ve understood correctly, his victims were hardly saints, not even Krumbiegel who treated Hannah like a slave.’
   ‘No, they weren’t saints, but the biggest sinner is still alive. Strutting about the place like the hottest literary property in town. I’m sorry, but I can’t allow it. The man belongs in jail.’
   ‘We’re going around in circles here. It won’t work. You don’t have to have studied law to see that.’
   ‘You don’t? Well, there’s a relief. Poor drop-out such as myself…’
   ‘Gereon… I didn’t mean it like that.’
   Before their conversation could deteriorate further Kirie came pitter-pattering over, and let both of them pet her. Kirie never took sides. Marlow followed.‘Nice dog,’ he said.
   ‘I hope you’re not planning on keeping her.’
   ‘You needn’t worry there.’ Marlow handed him a sheet of paper. ‘This just came through.’
   ‘What is it?’
   ‘A radio transmission from Police Headquarters.’
   ‘You listen to police radio?’ Charly asked.
   ‘I need to know what’s happening in Berlin,’ Marlow said, and pointed to the message. ‘I think this concerns the two of you more than me.’
   Rath looked at the paper. Charly had already begun to read.
   Security Service Berlin: notice to all frontier posts for the arrest of Dr Bernhard Weiss, ex deputy police commissioner, born 30/7/80, Berlin, formerly resident at Steinplatz 3, Berlin Charlottenburg. Description: 165 to 170cm, stocky, dark-grey hair, glasses, typical Jewish appearance, long nose, toothbrush moustache. Confirm upon arrest. Police Commissioner, Berlin, Sect. 1A.
   Section 1A, the Political Police, the department Bernhard Weiss helped establish, and even led in the years following the war, had put a warrant out for his arrest.
   89
   The man was sitting in exactly the same spot, white stick beside him, hat and cardboard sign in front. Sub-zero temperatures hadn’t deterred him in February. Today he was here just the same. With the Rothstein report submitted, Rath had put in for the rest of the week off, which Buddha had grudgingly approved. At some point he would have to use up the overtime he had accrued before the Reichstag fire, and with no new investigations running this was the perfect opportunity. He turned up his collar.
   Reaching the elevated railway Rath climbed a few stairs, turned and descended slowly, keeping an eye on the site where, around a month ago now, he had collected the soiled canvasses. The pillar where Gerhard Krumbiegel, and not Heinrich Wosniak, had been found.
   At the bottom he crouched beside the beggar and tried to adopt his perspective. Though partially unsighted by a steel column, he would have an excellent view of the crime scene. The man wore dark glasses, and from the side Rath could see his eyelids twitch as they blinked. Rath stood in front of him. The stench was unbearable.
   War-blind, please give generously, the cardboard sign said. Fetching his wallet he rummaged for change, took out a ten pfennig piece and held it over the hat. Then, instead of dropping the coin, he clenched his fist and made as if to punch the man’s face, only to brake millimetres in front of the dark glasses.
   The beggar flinched, no more than a slight jerk, then sat still as before, as if oblivious to the world around him. But Rath had seen enough. He tossed the coin, caught it and enclosed it in his fist. Sitting on the steps he did his best not to hold his nose.‘Nice spot you’ve got here.’
   ‘Are you taking the piss?’ the beggar asked.
   ‘Bet there are a lot of people who come by? A good spot for begging, is what I meant.’
   ‘If you say so.’
   ‘You here every day?’
   ‘Unless I’m needed in the office.’
   ‘What?’
   ‘Joke. Do I look I have an office?’
   ‘You look like the kind of man who doesn’t miss a trick.’
   ‘Youare taking the piss!’
   ‘Were you here towards the end of February?’
   ‘I don’t see how that’s any business of yours.’
   Rath took out his identification and watched the beggar turn pale under layers of dirt.‘Can you read it, or are your glasses too dark?’
   ‘Making fun of a poor veteran who lost his sight in the service of the Fatherland?’
   ‘Who knows what you lost in the service of the Fatherland. Maybe life dealt you a lousy hand. Hell, maybe you’re even short-sighted, but you are certainlynot blind!’ Rath raised his voice.
   The beggar placed a finger to his lips in horror.‘Shh. Not so loud! It’s bad for business.’
   ‘I’ve no intention of ruining your business, and maybe I won’t even take you down to Alex, but you’d better start being honest.’ He pointed towards the steel pillar. ‘A man lay dead there for days. Homeless, a beggar like you. No one gave a damn.’
   ‘I knew something wasn’t right, but I couldn’t go official, could I… being blind and all.’
   ‘You saw him then.’
   ‘Keep your voice down.Saw him? People might hear! At first I thought the two of them were friends. He’d just given him a thick coat.’
   ‘He gave him his coat?’
   ‘Not the one he was wearing. No, it was fine wool, but he had another under his arm, an old army coat.’
   ‘Which is why you thought they were friends?’
   ‘I don’t know about friends, but they knew each other, even a blind man could…’ The beggar fell silent and eyed his white stick in embarrassment. ‘I mean, it was obvious.’
   ‘What happened next?’
   ‘The tramp put on the coat, all thank you, thank you. And then… I’m not sure. I was only looking over every so often, you know how it is, I had… patrons to thank…’ he swallowed. ‘Anyway, next time I looked over, bowler-hat man was crouched by his friend on the ground. Patted him on the shoulder and off he went.’
   ‘Towards the station? Past you?’
   ‘No, towards Bülowstrasse.’
   ‘Did you see his face?’
   ‘He had his collar up and his hat was pulled down over his eyes. It looked like he had a few scars. I took them for old war comrades.’
   ‘Did you notice anything else about the man?’
   ‘There was one thing. He had a strange gait, always dragging one leg.’
   ‘What about the dead man?’
   ‘He was just crouched there. Looked like he had wrapped himself up to take a nap. I didn’t realise anything was amiss until he was still sitting like that the next day. But what could I do? A blind man?’
   ‘Even blind men can notify the police.’
   ‘Being blind is how I make my living, Inspector! I thought, let someone who can see him do it. Eventually, someone did.’
   90
   Friday night.Nibelungen had booked the grand lounge in Hotel Adlon. It was sold out, and Rath only got in by using his police badge.‘Your colleagues are already inside. At the back, beside the podium.’
   Reinhold Gräf sat with Steinke and a few other plainclothes officers from A and H Divisions, probably hoping Benjamin Engel, the murdering Jew as Levetzow called him, would be careless enough to show. The whole thing had the appearance of a large-scale operation between Homicide and Warrants, mounted on the commissioner’s orders, but Rath knew nothing about it, having steered clear of Alex since handing in the Rothstein report on Monday. This was a purely social call.
   Everywhere he looked, cops surveyed the diverse audience, the majority being prosperous types in evening dress alongside a number of veterans in uniform. One man had a prosthetic arm. Two or three had crutches by their chairs. None was as disfigured or damaged as the many war-disabled begging on Berlin’s streets.
   Then, of course, came the inevitable brown with black-white-and-red brassards, everywhere now, as if the Nazis were rabbits and mating season was in full swing. In reality they were ordinary people who had jumped on the bandwagon before it was too late. Like Marlow said: citizens who wanted to get ahead; but workers too, who had been beaten down by life and joined SA ranks to ensure that others shared their suffering.
   A familiar face jostled for position among the journalists in the first row. He had no wish for Berthold Weinert to see him, nor Gräf for that matter, or indeed any of his colleagues. Unusually for a book of this kind a number of women were also present, no doubt due to Roddeck’s previous existence as a dance host. He settled for a place at the back behind a fat lady, and hid his face in the information sheet which had beenpresented to him at the door.
   A string quartet opened proceedings with a rendition ofIch hatt’ einen Kameraden, a traditional lament, performed on this occasion without vocals. Roddeck understood how to make his book launch feel special, none of your brass music or nationalist chanting here. Instead, a touch of culture. When the music ended, Dr Hildebrandt, Roddeck’s bustling publisher, took up position behind the lectern. His tone was solemn, as if a fallen soldier were being laid to rest.
   Roddeck remained backstage while an extract was read by an actor. Naturally, they had chosen the scene in which Captain Engel murdered two French children and a German recruit.
   Only when the reading was at an end, and with the applause still resounding, did Baron Achim von Roddeck take to the stage, dressed, like so many others here, in his old service uniform. He bowed, and the applause reached a crescendo. When the final members of the audience had ceased clapping, he stepped behind the lectern and commenced his speech, flanked by police officers.
   ‘Ladies and Gentlemen, Brothers-at-Arms! Let me outline the reasons that led a man like me, who has always favoured the sword over the pen, to conclude, after many years, that publishing my war memoirs was in the best interests of the public at large.’
   What followed could have been straight out of a Nazi campaign speech. Rath had never heard anyone offer himself up so crudely to the ruling powers. According to Roddeck, Jews in the German army had brought nothing but misery to the Fatherland. Operation Alberich had been a tactical masterstroke, discredited by the treacherous actions of individuals such as Captain Benjamin Engel. With war methods that went against any notion of honour, the Jews had dragged the reputation of the glorious, unvanquished Germany army through the mire.
   Roddeck didn’t stop at Operation Alberich either. ‘Who was instrumental in the adoption of poison-gas warfare?’ he asked. ‘Perhaps some of you here tonight are unaware, but that, too, was a Jew. Like Benjamin Engel, Fritz Haber, who still occupies his position at the helm of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute, achieved the rank of captain during the war. A disgrace to German science, a disgrace to the German army.’
   Roddeck paused to gaze among the rows of seats.
   ‘From my own experience, all I will say is this. Were it not for the presence of Jews, no German soldier would have been enticed into perpetrating such atrocities, for which we are still being made to pay.’
   The audience was not used to German soldiers being accused of atrocities, and certainly hadn’t expected it here.
   ‘What they forget abroad,’ Roddeck declaimed with a conciliatory wave of the hand, ‘is that these acts were carried out byJews and not Germans. It is precisely these distortions, Ladies and Gentlemen, that my work intends to set right.’
   The volley of applause took Rath aback. Some rose to their feet, and more followed until the whole room stood in acclaim of Lieutenant von Roddeck. He made his way towards the exit. Leaving the room, he turned to look at the audience as it went berserk. Roddeck had his eyes closed, and Rath wondered if people here genuinely believed what he said, or were simply glad to point the finger elsewhere.
   The Jews are our misfortune. The sentence was a solution to all their problems. In the present, in the future and even, as Rath realised today for the first time, in the past.
   91
   Having removed his uniform, Baron Achim von Roddeck stood with outstretched arms before the mirror as a male attendant detached his cufflinks.
   Rath had waited in a dark corner of the hotel bar until Gräf, Steinke and the other CID men had left, before making his way to Roddeck’s suite, where the lieutenant had retired following his performance. He wondered if the man’s hotel arrangements were paid for by the public. Like the police manpower deployed by the commissioner to keep the supposedly endangered author safe, he suspected they were. It wasn’t that the public coffers were any more full than prior to the national uprising, rather that the people responsible were no longer obliged to justify every expense.
   His police badge had ensured access to the third floor. Seeing Rath led in, Roddeck turned in astonishment.‘Inspector, you’re the last person I expected to see!’
   ‘Just goes to show.’
   ‘What brings you here? Can I sign a book for you?’
   ‘That won’t be necessary.’
   ‘You can’t be here in an official capacity. Unless I am mistaken you are no longer in charge of the investigation.’
   ‘I’ve never distinguished much between private and professional.’
   ‘I don’t have a lot of time, Inspector. I’m about to leave for a reception given by the new Minister for Public Enlightenment and Propaganda.’
   ‘Goebbels is aware of you already?’
   ‘The Herr Minister is one of my most loyal readers. He has privately expressed concern that my novel wasn’t serialised inDer Angriff or at the very least theVölkischer Beobachter.’
   ‘A shame he couldn’t be here for the show.’
   ‘The Herr Minister sent his apologies, but…’ Roddeck pointed towards a gift-wrapped package on his desk. ‘…tonight I will present him with a personal copy, complete with dedication.’
   ‘I’m sure the Herr Minister can hardly contain his delight.’
   Roddeck looked at him as if he had stomach cramp.‘What are you doing here, Inspector? Don’t waste my time.’
   ‘Aren’t you surprised that Wosniak hasn’t been in touch?’
   Achim von Roddeck, whom the attendant was now helping into his dinner jacket, raised his eyebrows.‘Spare me the tasteless jokes! I helped to identify his body in the morgue. Did you forget?’
   ‘I don’t forget things easily. It’s one of my strengths.’
   ‘It can be a weakness too.’
   ‘What would you say if I could prove that the dead man from Nollendorfplatz wasn’t Heinrich Wosniak but a man named Gerhard Krumbiegel? The other survivor of the fire that made such a mess of your orderly.’
   ‘That would mean my faithful Heinrich is still alive!’
   ‘And that you lied to me in the morgue.’
   ‘I beg your pardon?’ Roddeck succeeded in looking horrified. ‘If what you are saying is true, then it’s possible I was mistaken, but I did not lie. If that corpse wasn’t Heinrich Wosniak then I’m sorry for falsely identifying him, but it wasn’t easy, you know… with all the scars.’
   ‘You seemed pretty certain at the time.’
   ‘As did you, Inspector. You’ll recall that the name Wosniak was already in all the papers. It was what led me to you in the first place.’
   ‘How do you propose to maintain your story about Todesengel?’
   ‘I’m afraid I don’t understand.’
   ‘The body at Nollendorfplatz no longer fits the pattern. Why would Benjamin Engel kill someone who had nothing to do with his old unit?’
   ‘What do I know, Inspector? Perhaps he got them mixed up, just like you and I did. Perhaps this Krum…?’
   ‘Krumbiegel.’
   ‘Perhaps this Krumbiegel was wearing Wosniak’s army coat. You found his service record too, as I recall. A man with burn scars in Wosniak’s coat. Easy enough to get mixed up, when you consider how many years had gone by.’
   The man had an answer for everything. Rath grew angrier.‘Are you claiming Krumbiegelstole Wosniak’s coat along with his service record?’
   ‘I’m speculating. Still, if that’s what you think…’
   ‘I’ll tell you what I think, shall I? Heinrich Wosniak pays his old beggar friend Krumbiegel a visit at Nollendorfplatz and donates his old soldier’s coat, in which he has already planted the service record. No sooner does Krumbiegel pull the thing on, but he feels Wosniak’s trench dagger being driven into his brain.’
   ‘I don’t understand what you’re getting at.’
   ‘That Wosniak killed Krumbiegel because he wanted to stage his own death.’
   ‘My faithful Heinrich! Why would he do that?’
   ‘I’ll know soon enough. I certainly don’t believe that Benjamin Engel killed all these men.’
   ‘You sound very sure.’
   Rath had to tread carefully. He had come here to catch Roddeck off guard, not give away what he knew.‘It’s just a theory. You have yours and I have mine. As far as I’m concerned Benjamin Engel is not behind these murders.’
   ‘Perhaps that’s why the commissioner took you off the case. I’d think about that if I were you.’
   Back on the street, Rath aimed a kick at one of the rubbish bins that was supposed to keep Unter den Linden, Berlin’s oldest boulevard, free from dirt. The bin was ripped from its moorings and its contents spilled on the pavement. He hadn’t been this angry in a long time.
   He had miscalculated. Achim von Roddeck was slippier than an eel, and to cap it all, seemed to know that Rath was onto him. It looked like Gereon Rath and his temper had made a hash of things again. At least on this occasion Gennat was none the wiser.
   92
   Sometimes Charly felt glad when Fritze was out with Kirie and she had time to catch her breath. Was he really so slow on the uptake or did he just not care? When she thought of everything she’d done to find him a school… If the boy didn’t get his head down soon he’d get a rude awakening after Easter, and the new session. He had gaps just about everywhere, and could barely write his own name. Capable of some basic arithmetic, his brain went on strike whenever fractions were involved. He seemed to have no idea how important these things were, and didn’t want to make the effort.
   Do you want to spend the rest of your days on the streets? I’m busting a gut to give you a decent life and you can’t even be bothered trying! More than once she had been close to telling a few home truths, but he had her wrapped around his little finger. It was impossible to stay angry.
   One night she’d asked Gereon to go through basic fractions with him, but he was even more impatient than her. What would they do when they had children of their own?
   Fritze’s interests lay elsewhere. Recently, after returning from his morning walk with Kirie, she had noticed sherbet powder on his lips. ‘Have you been buying sherbet? I don’t recall giving you any money.’
   ‘That’s ’cause you didn’t, Auntie.’
   ‘You haven’t been scrounging again?’ The constantAuntie Charly made her blood boil.‘Why do you do it? If you need money tell me!’
   ‘Sorry, Aunt Charly, it just happened. There was this man outside the station, begging to be parted from his cash.’
   ‘You don’t have to anymore.’
   ‘I didn’t mean any harm, and he was only too glad to help.’ With that he disappeared into the kitchen and produced another two sachets of sherbet powder. The boy needed a firm hand.
   She pondered the coming week with horror. On Monday she was due back in the Castle. Fritze would have all day to himself, but that was hardly her most pressing concern.
   Thinking of her office, of Women’s CID, of Friederike Wieking and Karin van Almsick, she felt positively sick. More so when she thought of the files gathering dust on her desk. Files on children and youths, some scarcely older than Fritze, none of whom fitted with the new regime’s plans and certainly not with those of her commanding officer. Finally Friederike Wieking had license to hunt down the youth gangs she had always despised.
   For years it had been Charly’s dream to work as a police officer and now, on the verge of becoming a CID inspector, with only the exam still to pass, she suddenly doubted whether this was the job for her. Not, at any rate, with Wieking as her superior. As for her caseload, she hadn’t taken up the job to hunt Communists.
   Every day theVossische Zeitung carried news items headedShot Attempting to Flee, and no matter where the reports came from, the details were always the same: wanted Communist arrested, attempts to fleeen route to the station, fails to heed the cries of police officers, summary execution.
   The audacity with which the written press continued to spread such lies was breathtaking. At least theVossische, which the Ritter family had read for generations, published these endless, identical reports in such a way that the lie was obvious.
   She had tried to contact Professor Heymann to seek his advice, but her old law professor had been granted sabbatical leave at his own request and couldn’t be reached. The university office couldn’t, or didn’t want to, say more. She knew from the paper that high-ranking figures, such as directors or professors, were being granted sabbatical leave almost as frequently as Communists were being shot. The common factor being that they were Jewish. Anti-Semitism was more than just electioneering. Last week, prior to the boycott, the SA had picked up all Jewish judges and lawyers from the court building on Grunerstrasse while, at the university, Jewish professors were said to have been assaulted by students. She hoped Professor Heymann had managed to get out in time.
   The doorbell returned her to the present. It was the postman.‘Fräulein Charlotte Ritter?’
   ‘Yes?’
   He never missed the chance to show his disapproval that she should live in an apartment with a different surname on the door.
   ‘A letter for you, from Prague.’ He stressed ‘Prague’ as if a letter from the Czech capital was the most obscene thing an upstanding German could receive.
   ‘I’m glad you know where it’s from. Did you look inside? Want to read it to me too while you’re at it?’
   The man looked at her as if she were serious, and perhaps thought she was.‘Read it out?’ He shook his head. ‘No time, Lady. Do you know how many houses I still have to visit?’
   She closed the door and went inside to examine the stamp. Pošta Československá. No sender. She didn’t know anyone in Prague. Unless Professor Heymann had…
   These days receiving mail from democratic countries made you a target of suspicion, and men like the postman were a perfect fit for this sick, new Germany. Sometimes Charly felt as if Berlin had been full of people just waiting for this government who were now, suddenly, revealing their true colours. As if the whole time somewhere deep under this city there had been another, darker Berlin that was seeping upwards like sewage rising in the street.
   That wasn’t true, of course, it was the same people inhabiting the same Berlin. The new government simply had a talent for bringing out the worst in its citizens.
   The letter was written on hotel paper.
   My dear Fräulein Ritter,

   My brother informed me of your concern regarding my whereabouts and mentioned what a great help you had been in these troubled times.
   Let me start by saying that all is well with myself and my family; as I write we are in Prague, where we have taken up residence in the Hotel Modrá Hvĕzda. I do not wish to speak of the events of recent weeks, but will say this much: I have seen places and sides of Germany that I never knew existed, both good and bad (places as well as sides).
   Spring is on its way here, bathing the city in golden light. It is hard not to feel optimistic. We are, at least, safe for now and must wait and see what happens next. I am friends with the police commissioner here and count on receiving his support.
   Thank you for everything, and pass on my regards to your future husband. Our police force needs people like you! And take comfort in the fact that nothing lasts forever.In the spirit of which I remain yoursB.W.
   She let the letter drop. Weiss was safe, the Political Police had been too late in issuing their warrant. Tears flooded her eyes, and she didn’t know why. Relief, perhaps, or grief.Rage that one of Germany’s most celebrated criminal investigators had been forced into exile like a common thief.
   The doorbell rang. She wiped the tears from her eyes before opening to a brawny man wrapped in a dark coat and wearing a bowler hat.
   93
   The morning after his visit to the Adlon, Rath shared the photos of Gerhard Krumbiegel with Gräf and Steinke in the main Homicide office. He was still off-duty, but a visit to Alex had become unavoidable. If Achim von Roddeck knew about Krumbiegel it was essential to bring the official investigation up to speed. He put the letter from Halle in a new envelope, removing the note to Charly. The photographs spoke for themselves; there was no doubt this was the dead man from Nollendorfplatz.
   ‘Stray post…’ he said. ‘Landed in my office. Actually it was addressed to me, but it’s part of your case.’ He shook them onto the desk. ‘Gerhard Krumbiegel,’ he said, slapping the flat of his hand on the table. ‘The corpse from Nollendorfplatz was Gerhard Krumbiegel, not Heinrich Wosniak.’
   Steinke glared at him, while Gräf stared at the photos. ‘Engel must have got them mixed up because he was wearing Wosniak’s coat, and because of the burn scars from the Bülowplatz fire.’
   ‘Really? Do they look that similar?’
   ‘We have no photo of Wosniak, but if his former lieutenant got them mixed up, then it’s safe to say Engel did too…’
   His attempt to steer Gräf’s thinking had failed. He couldn’t afford to be any more explicit. ‘What are you going to do now?’
   ‘Intensify the search,’ Gräf said. ‘If Engel got the wrong man we have to do everything we can to find Wosniak. Perhaps we can use him to lure Engel into a trap.’
   ‘No sign of our captain last night?’
   ‘I think he was deterred by the police presence. It’s good to know it’s paying off. There’s no question Lieutenant Roddeck is safer for it.’
   Steinke had reached for the telephone and asked to be patched through to Warrants. Rath gave up. Let them search if that was all they could think of.‘Good luck,’ he said, hoping Gräf would hear the sarcasm.
   ‘Thank you, Gereon,’ Gräf said. ‘Perhaps we can go for a drink when this is all over.’ He seemed glad his old partner was speaking to him again.
   Rath left, stopping briefly at his office before heading home. He might be finally rid of the photos, but it seemed unlikely the official investigation would create problems for Achim von Roddeck any time soon.
   Opening the door to the apartment, he was surprised to hear voices from the living room. It wasn’t Fritze, and it wasn’t the radio. A deep, booming bass. A dark coat and bowler hat hung on the stand. Entering the room he was ready for anything: for the grinning man, or another of Charly’s university friends, even the Negro from Aschinger who occasionally still haunted his dreams (and about whom she kept quiet to this day), but not for the man sitting in his favourite armchair, a cup of coffee on his lap, speaking earnestly with Charly.
   ‘Sir,’ Rath said. ‘To what do we owe the honour?’
   Wilhelm Böhm looked to the door in surprise. ‘No more “Sir”,’ he growled, setting down his coffee and rising to shake Rath’s hand.
   ‘They demoted you?’
   ‘I jumped before I was pushed.’
   ‘The coffee’s fresh,’ said Charly. She fetched a cup and poured.
   ‘I’ve retired from police service,’ Böhm explained. ‘Our commissioner would never have allowed me back into Homicide. I’ve already spoken with Gennat.’
   ‘I’m considering following suit,’ Charly said, ‘but Böhm advises against.’
   ‘I’ve suggested that your bride-to-be consider thinks very carefully before destroying her career.’
   ‘Anyway I’ve extended my leave of absence.’
   Rath’s gaze flitted back and forth. What the hell was she talking about?
   ‘What will you do now?’ he asked Böhm. ‘Do you have private means?’
   ‘I’m not as wealthy as you must think. Besides, I’m too young to pack it in completely. It’s possible to be a detectiveoutside of the police.’
   ‘If you’re looking for a job as house detective, I could put you in touch with someone at the Excelsior,’ Rath said, earning an angry glance from Charly.
   Böhm waved dismissively. ‘I was thinking of starting my own agency.’
   ‘I hope you’re not here to recruit Charly.’
   ‘We were having a perfectly normal discussion between friends and ex-colleagues until you arrived,’ she said, sharper than Rath thought necessary.
   ‘Charly’s been telling me about the strange developments in our old case,’ Böhm said, attempting to change the subject. ‘You know, the dead man from Nollendorfplatz. I understand Levetzow has reassigned you?’
   ‘He has.’
   ‘Don’t take it personally. It’s almost a badge of honour to be spurned by our latest commissioner.’
   ‘Gereon makes a point of being spurned by every commissioner,’ said Charly.
   ‘Levetzow usually lets Homicide go about its work in peace, but this case is different,’ Rath said.
   ‘You don’t think his intervention has been for the better?’
   ‘With all due respect to Gräf, I don’t believe we’ll solve these killings by fixating on a single suspect who might not even be alive.’
   Böhm agreed. ‘Charly has explained that the dead man at Nollendorfplatz wasn’t Heinrich Wosniak, but the other beggar. His corpse doesn’t fit with the rest.’
   Rath threw Charly a horrified glance. What else had she given away?‘It’s not for me to worry now I’ve been taken off the case.’
   ‘On the contrary,’ Böhm said. ‘Your theory about a deliberate identity switch would mean Heinrich Wosniak murdered his former companion and faked his own death, in order to set about killing his ex-comrades.’
   At least, Rath thought, she hasn’t told him Wosniak’s corpse is lying at the bottom of the Spree.
   ‘You’re right about one thing,’ Böhm continued. ‘On no account should you risk making a fool of the police commissioner. These days it could cost you more than your livelihood.’
   Rath agreed politely, thinking Böhm was starting to sound like a rich uncle whose advice you couldn’t contradict.
   Böhm stood up and they accompanied him into the hall where he shook both their hands. ‘I’ll be on my way now,’ he said. ‘Thank you for the coffee, Charly, and for your hospitality, Herr Rath. It’s good to have friends in times like these.’
   Rath nodded and forced a smile. No sooner was Böhm out the door than he turned to Charly. She had a guilty look on her face. ‘You’veextended your leave of absence?’
   ‘I’m sorry Böhm heard it before you. His visit caught me off guard. I was going to tell you today that I’d seen Wieking.’
   ‘What did she say?’
   ‘She wasn’t pleased, but I need more time.’
   ‘Charly, this isn’t good. You’re off sick for two weeks, now this? It looks like you’re shirking. Goddamn it, you’re this close to becoming an inspector!’
   ‘I can’t be there right now, I’ve told you that.’
   ‘What did you tell Wieking?’
   ‘Marriage preparations. She’s more likely to understand that.’
   ‘I’ll tell you what else she’s more likely to understand. Women staying at home to look after their children.’
   ‘If there’s one thing I don’t want, it’s to stay at home.’
   ‘Then what have you been doing these last few weeks? Because you certainly haven’t been at work!’
   ‘Maybe that’s why I’ve been in such a good mood!’ She turned on her heel and slammed the door.
   Rath shook his head. What on earth was wrong with her? At least this time she hadn’t slapped him. Or gone to Greta’s, just back into the living room.
   The doorbell rang and he opened to Fritze grinning at him with Kirie in tow.‘Well,’ the boy said. ‘Together again at last?’
   94
   The day Rath had been dreading came as a perfectly ordinary Tuesday afternoon.
   ‘Sounds like Gräf will be rejoining us soon,’ Erika Voss said.
   ‘Has Levetzow given him his marching orders already? After just two weeks?’
   ‘I’m afraid he has been rather more successful than you, Sir,’ she said, with a distinct lack of sympathy. ‘He’s found Benjamin Engel. Which means he’ll be back as soon as they close the Alberich file.’
   ‘He’s found Engel?’
   ‘Dead or alive, the commissioner said. Well, dead it is. They found his corpse in the Spree.’
   Rath didn’t have to wait long for the full story.
   Heinrich Wosniak’s mortal remains hadn’t made it as far as the Mühlendamm Lock. They had been washed ashore just beyond the Schilling Bridge, when an eagle-eyed pool attendant noticed a white shape floating near the public baths. Using long sticks, he and a colleague reached for the strange, ghost-like bundle, but the fabric ripped, and the corpse broke free and floated to the surface. Forensics took it from there.
   The disfigured face, the burn wounds, the clothing, all pointed towards the mystery killer, and the sheet the body was wrapped inside also contained several cobblestones and a trench dagger with triangular cross-section. Gräf had no hesitation in notifying the commissioner and declaring the case closed. The mass-murderer Benjamin Engel had surfaced, in the truest sense of the word, from the depths of the Spree.
   Much as Magnus von Levetzow advocated caution in dealings with the press, he had no less performance instinct than his predecessors, and a press conference was arranged for that afternoon. Rath decided to tag along uninvited and mingle with the journalists. Towards the back he spied a familiar face for the second time in recent days.‘Berthold!’
   ‘Gereon! Shouldn’t you be up there?’ Berthold Weinert pointed to the podium.
   ‘It’s not my case anymore.’
   ‘Sorry… didn’t mean to offend.’ Weinert was whispering now. ‘Was it political?’
   ‘Just a difference of opinion.’
   ‘Sounds like maybe we should meet for a beer.’
   ‘Let’s see what this lot have to say first.’
   They were all there, even Gennat, hauling his heavy frame up the double step. Buddha hated acting as a figurehead for Commissioner Levetzow, whose sole interest for weeks now had been catching Benjamin Engel and parading him before the public. The commissioner took his seat in the middle, flanked by Gennat and Gräf. Last to take to the stage was Achim von Roddeck. A murmur passed among the journalists. Most recognised his face; many would have been present at the Adlon launch.
   Levetzow opened proceedings, announcing the discovery of the corpse before introducing Gennat. Buddha, in turn, handed the floor to Detective Gräf who, nervously at first, gave a detailed report of the discovery, the trench dagger and the similarity between the corpse and the man who had been sighted around several previous murders.
   ‘We had good reason to proceed on the assumption that we were dealing with the disabled war veteran Benjamin Engel. To eradicate any lingering doubt, only moments ago, we invited someone to identify the body. This man not only knew Benjamin Engel, but has written about him: Lieutenant Baron Achimvon Roddeck to whom I bid the warmest of welcomes.’
   Roddeck rose to his feet and made a bow as if he were being applauded, which, Rath was pleased to note, he was not. These journalists had their plus points.
   ‘If Herr von Roddeck would care to provide his own impressions.’
   ‘Gladly, Detective,’ said Roddeck, as his gaze wandered over the room. When he caught sight of Rath he looked momentarily confused, but continued. ‘Though heavily scarred by an explosion sixteen years ago, I am almost certain the corpse is that of Captain Engel.’
   Rath wondered if, were it not for his own presence, the lieutenant might have saidabsolutely certain as opposed toalmost certain. On hearing thealmost, Gräf made a surprised face. Roddeck must have been less equivocal in the morgue.
   Gräf went on to explain that the investigation into Engel’s death was still in its infancy, and journalists would be kept abreast of developments.
   ‘From what we know so far, he was stabbed with his own trench dagger. Forensics have discovered seven stab wounds, of which three could have been fatal. As yet we have been unable to reconstruct the precise sequence of events, nor have we isolated the crime scene, although we are looking at an area somewhere in the vicinity of the Brommy Bridge. One hundred emergency officers, along with a canine unit and several forensic technicians, are combing both sides of the Spree.’
   Rath hoped he and Charly had left nothing incriminating behind.
   ‘Feel free,’ Gräf continued, ‘to report that we are seeking witnesses. If anyone noticed anything suspicious in this area between two and two-and-a-half weeks ago, they should contact police headquarters and ask for the Alberich team. We will be issuing a press release to this effect.’
   Rath looked at Weinert’s notepad. He hadn’t written much but raised his hand. ‘One question! Do you have any idea who might be responsible?’
   Gräf left this to Levetzow. ‘Whether or not to go public with this has been a matter of careful consideration,’ the commissioner said, ‘since it looks as though we are not dealing withmurder, but with self-defence.’ Magnus von Levetzow glanced at Gennat, who ignored the look. ‘We are proceeding on the assumption that Benjamin Engel underestimated his intended victim’s skill in hand-to-hand combat. The man’s only mistake was to dump Engel’s corpse in the Spree rather than notify the police.’
   ‘It sounds as if you have a name, Commissioner,’ Weinert said.
   ‘Indeed, I do,’ Levetzow said. ‘The name of the man responsible for Benjamin Engel’s death, and who – let me emphasise this – has nothing to fear from the criminal prosecution authorities, is…’ The journalists reached for their notepads. ‘…Heinrich Wosniak.’
   More than just a murmur passed through the room as the journalists talked over one another.
   ‘Wosniak?’ someone shouted. ‘Wasn’t he the first victim in this series of murders?’
   ‘Apparently not,’ Levetzow said. ‘Detective Gräf?’ He handed Gräf a note and the detective looked as if he had been blindsided.
   ‘What the commissioner is referring to is…’ He cleared his throat. ‘For a short time we have known that Benjamin Engel’s first victim was not Heinrich Wosniak, as… Detective Chief Inspector Böhm’s team wrongly stated.’
   Rath suspected Gräf was smearing Böhm on Levetzow’s orders and, for the first time in his life, was angry at hearing his former DCI’s name being dragged through the mire.
   ‘Rather,’ Gräf continued, ‘his name was Gerhard Krumbiegel, a man with whom Wosniak lived for many years as part of a begging gang, and who, like Wosniak, sustained serious burns in an arson attack carried out on New Year’s Eve 1931.’
   More noise in the room.
   ‘Did you know about this?’ Weinert whispered. Rath nodded. ‘My offer of a beer is still valid.’
   Again, Rath nodded, realising that he couldn’t say anything without incriminating himself. He started slowly towards the exit, looking at Roddeck as he went. The man was ill at ease, that much was plain, having lied in the morgue on two separate occasions. Somewhere in those eyes was fear, but of what? Discovery? Benjamin Engel? ApparentlyRoddeck suspected, perhaps even knew, that his former captain had survived the war. What he couldn’t know was that the man he called Todesengel had succumbed to his injuries five years ago, and now, realising this latest corpse spelled the end of his police protection, he was scared. Of the ghosts he himself had invoked.
   A smile formed on Rath’s face. It was time he was on his way. The journalists grew restless as the police commissioner rose again to speak. ‘I would like to offer my express thanks to Detective Gräf and Cadet Steinke. Gentlemen, we need men like you in the new Germany!’
   Without quite knowing why, Rath felt relieved it wasn’t him being thanked on the podium.
   95
   Porcelain tinkled as coffee was stirred, otherwise the only sound was the rustling of newspapers. Charly peered at Fritze, bowed over theVossische Zeitung funny papers as he scoffed his final bread roll. Gereon was hidden behind the World News section.
   ‘The first of May is to be a national holiday,’ she said, over the top of her paper.
   Gereon nodded mechanically.‘They’re allowed to drink again in New York.’
   ‘They’re calling itGerman Labour Day. The Communists will be pleased the Nazis are stealing their day of action along with everything else. They’ve already commandeered the Liebknechthaus.’
   ‘Just beer for the time being, they’re starting off slow.’
   A loud snort made Charly look up. Fritze looked at them both and said:‘You’re talking at cross purposes!’
   Charly looked at Gereon, who lowered his paper and smiled.
   ‘I’m taking the dog out,’ the boy said, sticking the last piece of bread between his teeth. Kirie followed him eagerly into the hallway and moments later they heard the front door click shut.
   ‘I think Fritze wants us to have a little time to ourselves,’ Charly said.
   ‘He could tell we were beating about the bush,’ Gereon muttered.
   ‘Did you know?’
   She didn’t have to explain which article she was referring to. It was the one they had scrupulously avoided discussing all morning.
   ‘You were asleep when I got home yesterday, otherwise I’d have mentioned it.’
   ‘They find the corpse and mistake Wosniak for Engel? Really?’
   ‘They’re so fixated on Engel that I’m not surprised,’ said Rath. ‘I think Gennat’s the only one who has doubts.’
   ‘I thought as soon as Reinhold saw the Krumbiegel photos he’d realise Wosniak’s the killer.’
   ‘He doesn’t know what we know. We have Hannah, he doesn’t.’
   ‘We’re not dragging her into this, Gereon! I thought we’d agreed on that. Hannah Singer on the stand probably wouldn’t get a word out, and fugitives from the asylum don’t tend to make credible witnesses.’
   ‘I’m not planning anything of the sort. I only gave Reinhold the photos, nothing else.’ He tapped theVossische Zeitung, which had devoted two columns and a large headline to the death of the murderer Benjamin Engel.‘You see the result.’
   ‘Has Fritze seen it?’
   ‘He only reads the funnies. Besides, he doesn’t know anything. Not really. The name Engel means nothing to him. He wouldn’t guess it’s the man he stabbed to death.’
   ‘Let’s hope so. The last thing we need is for him to get nervous and start talking.’
   ‘Nothing can happen to him,’ Gereon said. ‘Not when the commissioner himself’s promised immunity from prosecution.’
   ‘Cut the jokes. They aren’t funny.’
   ‘Levetzow’s performance yesterday was a farce, but they all bought it. Weinert was the only one who tried to dig.’
   Charly fell silent. Ever since the night of the fire when he had exploited her indiscretion, Weinert’s was a name she could do without. ‘WhyWeinert of all people?’ she asked.
   ‘There was someone next to him at the press conference, sowing the seeds of doubt.’
   ‘You were at the press conference? Are you mad? What did you say?’
   ‘Queried a few minor details… The identity of the corpse for example. Weinert wanted to go for a beer but I didn’t let things get that far.’
   ‘It’s enough to be hanging around a press conference without an invite.’
   ‘It was my case.’
   ‘Did Levetzow see you?’
   ‘What if he did?’
   ‘Reinhold?’
   ‘The only person I’m certain saw me is Achim von Roddeck, and that’s a good thing!’
   ‘I can’t think why.’
   ‘Don’t you see? Now he realises I know more than the others, but he can’t say anything to Levetzow, because it would make him a suspect. If he hadn’t identified his faithful Heinrich as Benjamin Engel, Homicide would have asked why Heinrich Wosniak killed all these men. All you’d need then is a single witness who’d seen Wosniak and Roddeck together and it would be over.’
   Charly took a sip of coffee.
   Gereon continued:‘Roddeck suspects that I know the Spree corpse is Wosniak, and the fact that I haven’t shared this information with the Alberich team is making him nervous. The death of the Alberich-killer means his police protection being stood down. In Roddeck’s mind, he’s now in real danger. Because he believes Benjamin Engel is still alive. And because he must think his novel stands a decent chance of flushing him out.’
   ‘You mean that pack of lies was intended to lure Engel out of hiding?’
   ‘Yes, because Roddeck believes – rightly as it happens – that Engel took the French gold.’
   ‘He meant to corner Engel, so that he could get his hands on it himself?’
   ‘I don’t know about that, but he certainly can’t have expected his faithful Heinrich to be murdered. That must have spiked his guns, especially since he’ll be wondering who on earth stabbed the man.’
   ‘Well, so long as you’re happy.’
   ‘If we can’t get him, then the least we can do is put the fear in him, don’t you think? Perhaps if he’s frightened enough he’ll give himself away.’
   ‘I don’t understand you. Why do you still care? You were taken off the case weeks ago.’
   ‘You’re a fine one to talk. You were pretty involved yourself a few days back.’
   ‘That’s right. Because I wanted to protect the children, but now Wosniak is dead.’
   ‘You really want Roddeck to get away with this? He’s had three people murdered. As well as robbing another man of his reputation with character assassination dressed as literature.’
   ‘I don’t know, Gereon. Fundamentally, you’re right, but how are you going to prove any of it? Do you really think anyone in the new Germany cares about justice?’
   ‘I do.’
   She stopped short when he said it, suddenly realising how cowardly she had been, and how pitiful it was to sit back and do nothing. It was time to follow through on the decision she had been mulling over for weeks and translate her thoughts into action.
   Still, she struggled to get the words out.‘After Easter I’m going to speak with Wieking again, I’m going to… resign.’ There, she’d said it at last.
   ‘So soon before the inspector’s exam?’ He looked at her wide-eyed. ‘Is it… are you pregnant?’
   ‘No!’ She had to laugh seeing him there, completely beside himself. She became serious again. ‘We’ve talked about it often enough… Wieking, the Communist witch-hunt, everything the WKP stands for.’
   ‘That’s no reason to throw in the towel.’
   ‘I can’t work there anymore, not for this police force in this state.’
   ‘You can’t just go chucking it in. When I think of how long you’ve been striving for this. Things change.’
   ‘You really think so?’
   ‘Nothing stays the same. Things always change.’
   ‘The question is when.’
   ‘I certainly wouldn’t tell Wieking what you’ve just told me. The new government is sensitive about that sort of thing; the Nazis want to be loved.’
   ‘And if you aren’t prepared to court them, they break your skull.’
   ‘Something like that.’ He needed time to digest the news. ‘Have you really thought about this? You haven’t completed your probationary period, you’ll have nothing if you quit now.’
   ‘I’ll have my state examination.’
   ‘What are you going to do with that? Go back to Professor Heymann? He’s Jewish in case you’d forgotten, hardly the best reference in the new Germany.’
   She could have slapped him. Did he even realise that Heymann was one of those who had been forced out of office despite the new law supposedly not applying to veterans?Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service they’d termed it, cynically, when in reality it got rid of thousands of decorated officials. She was about to give Gereon a piece of her mind when the telephone rang. Answering, she was surprised to hear a familiar voice.
   ‘Speaking of Jews in the new age,’ she said. ‘Dr Schwartz. For you.’
   96
   It was still overcast but the rain had stopped. Rath parked on Robert-Koch-Platz and proceeded on foot. He had a strange premonition, which was why he had asked to meet in the lunch break rather than during office hours.
   Evidently Magnus Schwartz, the pathologist, shared his concern. Following his resignation from all duties (to spare him worse) he had summoned Rath to a cafe just next to the Neues Tor. He hadn’t said what it was about, insisting instead on a face-to-face meeting.
   Schwartz sat alone at a window table reading the newspaper. Seeing Rath, he stood up.‘Good of you to come, Inspector,’ he said, shaking Rath’s hand. ‘I’d buy you a coffee, but I think it’s better if we take a walk.’ Even in his local cafe a law-abiding citizen such as Magnus Schwartz no longer felt safe from informers. Berliners were becoming more and more suspicious.
   ‘Then let’s go,’ Rath said.
   Outside they faced a chill breeze. The pavement was still wet but the sky was starting to clear. They strolled along Invalidenstrasse, where on the other side of the road the façade of the Natural History Museum rose impressively into the sky. ‘What’s on your mind, Doctor?’
   ‘It’s about the corpse they found yesterday in the Spree. This war-disabled fellow, but I thought I’d rather speak with you in private.’
   Rath said nothing and waited.
   ‘Karthaus sought me out. Karthaus, who a few weeks ago suggested I take early retirement.’ Schwartz shook his head. ‘Did you know he’s a Nazi now too?’
   ‘I can’t say I’m surprised.’
   ‘You need to be, to get on in the new Germany. There are evenJews who want to join the party. They can’t have read the manifesto.’ The doctor waved his hand dismissively. ‘Karthaus is carrying on as if everything is normal between us, as if I took early retirement because of my age. A simple passing on of the baton.’
   After only a few metres they turned onto Hessische Strasse, moving towards the Charité Hospital and the morgue. Rath wondered what the veteran pathologist was getting at, but curbed his impatience and waited for Schwartz to make his point.
   ‘Anyway, Karthaus shows me this corpse, wants confirmation that the puncture channels match those I examined a few weeks back.’
   ‘Do they?’
   ‘Without question, but that isn’t why I wanted to see you.’ He came to a halt and looked Rath in the eye. ‘Inspector, there is no way on earth that corpse belongs to Benjamin Engel, even if a thousand witnesses say otherwise.’
   Rath feigned surprise.‘What makes you say that?’
   ‘Engel is a baptised Jew, am I right?’ Rath nodded. ‘But Jewish born and bred.’
   ‘Yes. He was baptised Catholic prior to his marriage.’
   ‘The man in there…’ Schwartz pointed in the direction of the morgue, ‘…is no Jew.’
   ‘How can you be so sure?’
   ‘He hasn’t been circumcised.’ Dr Schwartz looked at Rath triumphantly. ‘With all the stab wounds and burn scars, no one seemed to notice. He also has two older wounds that haven’t healed, to the buttocks and upper thigh.’
   From Hannah, Rath thought.‘What does Karthaus say?’
   ‘He was painfully embarrassed, but gave me to understand that none of it could appear in his report.’
   ‘I see.’
   ‘He’s afraid it will make the commissioner look foolish. Seems our Levetzow was a little too eager to stick his head above the parapet.’ Schwartz shook his head. ‘Karthaus cried his eyes out over his own helplessness. An affront when you think how brazenly he’s exploited the political situation himself.’
   ‘Some people are oblivious to the damage they cause.’ Rath remembered Böhm’s words. How risky it was to make a fool of the commissioner. ‘Why are you telling me all this?’ he asked. ‘Detective Gräf is leading the investigation.’
   ‘I can’t get involved officially, I’d be stabbing Karthaus in the back.’
   ‘You prefer to do your backstabbingunofficially?’
   ‘I know you’ll keep investigating.’ Schwartz hunched his shoulders. ‘You’ve never worried about being taken off a case. As far as you’re concerned, that’s just the chiefs telling you not to put in for overtime.’
   ‘You’ve seen right through me, Doctor!’
   ‘Böhm’s confided in me on more than one occasion how difficult you are to work with.’
   ‘He’s no picnic himself.’
   ‘Yet he has always spoken very highly of you.’
   ‘He has?’ It would be hard to find anyone who made a greater show of disdaining him than Wilhelm Böhm. ‘Böhm’s handed in his notice too,’ Rath said, as casually as possible.
   ‘Sabbatical, early retirement, resignation, that’s the fate of many a public official these days. Funny, Hitler has always spoken aboutlowering unemployment. I’d question whether ousting civil servants is the way to go about it…’
   Reaching the morgue, the pathologist halted as if to enter one last time and show Rath his findings. Instead he sighed.‘Only a few weeks ago. Göring was telling the world that so long as the Jewish community went about its affairs and proved itself to be loyal, no one had anything to fear. Idiot that I am, I believed him. He just wouldn’t tolerate Jews in positions of government, he said, that’s all.’ Schwartz pointed towards the dirty yellow brick building. ‘Does that look like aposition of government? The Berlin morgue? So why, I ask you, am I no longer entitled to work there?’
   Rath didn’t know how to respond and caught himself turning away. Damn it, he thought, horrified at himself, if things carry on like this the Nazis really will turn us into a nation of cynical, good-for-nothing cowards.
   97
   For the first time in weeks, the Alberich investigation played a lead role during A Division morning briefing. Since the discovery of the corpse, Homicide had renewed their interest in the case, and even Forensics had plenty to be getting on with, as Kronberg set out in his own, inimitable way.
   Searching both sides of the Spree, they had struck lucky in an abandoned joinery workshop. The place had been broken into and traces of blood found in the sawdust. The blood group matched that of the deceased. The building had formerly been a cabinetmaker’s works and Kronberg emphasised that Benjamin Engel had been a furniture dealer before the war.
   Rath was careful not to shake his head. CID officers just couldn’t stop looking for connections, even when there were none.
   Kronberg suggested that Gräf investigate whether the bankrupt cabinetmaker had any links with Benjamin Engel’s furniture business, and Gennat nodded his approval. Could they no longer acknowledge a coincidence, or did it just seem that way to someone who knew the corpse had been falsely identified, but couldn’t say? The dead man’s foreskinproved the commissioner was wrong, and that the Alberich team had got sloppy. Rath was tempted to put the idea in Gräf’s head:Word on the street is your Jew isn’t even circumcised.
   Once upon a time he could have exposed the error with a press release, but there was no way he could involve Weinert. Not only because reporters were no longer free to report, or because he had something to hide. The truth was that he was scared. Gereon Rath wasscared of making a fool of the police commissioner.
   As always when leading an investigation Gräf appeared slightly overwhelmed, but Gennat came to his aid. Without undermining his detective, Buddha thanked Kronberg and outlined the next steps. It was a skilful performance which flattered Gräf and made it seem as if the pair had discussed the matter prior to briefing.
   Gennat’s intervention notwithstanding, Gräf cut a dash. The commissioner had praised him publicly, and even the senior officers strove to make a good impression. Promotion was possible again in the new Germany, but then so was being fired. Or, indeed, being fired at.
   While Gräf basked in admiration, Rath returned to his office, consoling himself that the investigation was the biggest farce ever to have spawned overtime. How he longed to stand, like the boy in theEmperor’s New Clothes, and open everyone’s eyes. Instead he found himself responsible for the most feeble-minded task of all.
   ‘You were in Bonn recently, Inspector,’ Gennat had said. ‘See if you can establish what relationship existed between the cabinetmakers in Berlin and Engel’s furniture business in Bonn.’
   Was he being ironic, or was this a serious request? Feeling Gennat return his gaze, he looked down at the piece of paper on which Gräf or Kronberg, or whoever it was, had written the name of the store.Ohligs Cabinetmakers
   In his lonely office, the letters stirred unpleasant memories. He had asked Erika Voss to look into the bankruptcy, saying he would contact Bonn himself. A call he knew he would never make.
   He wondered whether Eva Heinen had been informed. Had Gräf telephoned to say that her husband had survived the war but turned up dead in the Spree, or had they entrusted it to Bonn? Probably the latter. He imagined the two cops from the police Opel ending their four-week observation with a knock on her door. How they would look, with undisguised voyeurism, at the elegant Eva Heinen, and inform her, with equally undisguised sadism, that her husband, the serial killer, had died in violent circumstances. How would Eva Heinen react? Erika Voss returned him to the present with a knock.
   ‘What is it?’
   She poked her head inside.‘Taxicab for you, Sir. It’s waiting at the entrance on Grunerstrasse.’
   ‘Must be a misunderstanding.’
   ‘The driver mentioned you expressly by name. He’s downstairs with the porter. Would you like to speak with him yourself?’
   ‘Patch him through.’ He reached for the telephone. ‘Listen, I didn’t order a taxi…’
   ‘I know,’ a male voice interrupted. ‘Someone ordered it for you.’
   ‘Who?’
   ‘I’m not at liberty to say, but he’ll pick up the tab.’
   It must be Marlow. Had something happened to Hannah? Or Juretzka?‘All right. Down in three.’
   ‘I’ll wait in the car.’
   He took his hat and coat from the hook and reached for his briefcase.‘Let me guess,’ Erika Voss said. ‘You’re not coming back.’
   ‘Correct. Just leave whatever you’ve found on my desk.’
   Erika Voss rarely smiled these days. The atmosphere was frostier since Gräf had switched partners. Rath was frostier too.
   A lone taxi waited on Grunerstrasse. Premium rate. No sooner had he sat down than it started from the kerb.‘I didn’t realise we were in a hurry.’
   The driver wore a peaked cap and thin wire-framed spectacles. In the rearview mirror Rath could make out a neat bow tie and alert eyes.‘Time is money,’ he said.
   ‘Since I’m not paying, I’ll ask that you slow down. Where are we even going? They crossed the Jannowitz Bridge. Thick cloud lay over the Spree. ‘Perhaps you’re not allowed to say? Who’s your employer?’
   ‘You are Detective Inspector Gereon Rath, Homicide?’
   ‘The same.’
   The driver stopped at a red light and turned around.‘Show me your identification.’
   Rath fumbled the document from his wallet and passed it forward.
   The driver took a close look at him in the rearview mirror and returned the identification. The light changed to green and they crossed Köpenicker Strasse heading south. Instinctively Rath felt for his shoulder holster and the outline of his Walther.
   ‘You’ve been looking for Franz Thelen?’ the driver asked suddenly. Rath had been ready for the Nordpiraten, even the SA, but not this. After all the fuss about the corpse, he had lost sight of the real Benjamin Engel. The mysterious driver, of whom Eva Heinen apparently had no memory. ‘You’re taking me to Thelen? Does he live in Berlin?’
   ‘No.’
   ‘Then where are we going?’
   ‘I’m taking you for a spin. Thelen’s dead but I can tell you his story.’
   ‘Did Eva Heinen send you?’
   ‘Do you want to hear it or not? I can just as easily set you back down at Alex.’
   Rath sighed and leaned back.‘Go on,’ he said, ‘but do me a favour and stop referring to yourself in the third person, Herr Thelen.’
   The driver filtered into the traffic on Moritzplatz.
   ‘Your new name is Erich Heintze, if I read the sign on your door correctly, and you’re the owner of this taxi company. Did Eva Heinen suggest you pay me a visit?’
   ‘Does it matter?’
   ‘Why do you prefer to be dead, Herr Thelen, and why did Benjamin Engel?’
   ‘These days I rarely take the wheel myself, but for you I’ll make an exception. Free of charge, like I said.’ He reached for the meter and switched it off. ‘Franz Thelen has no wish for his identity to be exposed, Inspector, since his life would be in danger, just like the three Alberich victims.’
   ‘The killer’s dead. Don’t you read the papers?’
   ‘The papers say Benjamin Engel is dead, but we both know that isn’t right. Nor did he kill those three men. Who’s the body from the Spree? Is it Wosniak?’
   ‘What makes you say that?’
   ‘It’s him, isn’t it? He faked his own death to go about butchering his victims unsuspected.’
   ‘He wanted people to think he was dead. Now he is.’
   ‘That’s what all of us share. We’d like to be dead or be someone else.’
   ‘What happened in the war?’
   ‘Franz Thelen didn’t see everything, Inspector, he was only the captain’s driver. And a good friend.’
   ‘Like I said: there’s no need for you to refer to yourself in the third person.’
   ‘I’ve grown accustomed to the fact that Franz Thelen is gone. Perhaps you should too.’
   ‘Who are you afraid of? Heinrich Wosniak is dead.’
   ‘But not his lieutenant.’
   ‘You mean Roddeck.’ Thelen nodded. ‘Listen, I think he set the whole thing up, but don’t know why. I can’t prove anything either.’
   ‘He killed Wosniak, I’m certain of it. The man had served his purpose. Roddeck no longer needed him.’
   ‘Kill his faithful Heinrich?’
   ‘They weren’t quite as cordial as Roddeck’s novel makes out.’
   Rath considered this. Perhaps that really was Roddeck’s plan, only Fritze had got in the way. They were passing the gasworks by the Landwehr canal. His old neck of the woods. ‘Mind if I smoke?’
   ‘Go ahead.’
   He felt for his cigarette case and lit up.‘Where are my manners? Can I offer you one?’
   Thelen reached back.‘Overstolz,’ he said. ‘A taste of home.’
   ‘You’re from Cologne?’
   ‘The Rhineland anyway. Like most of us back then.’
   ‘You returned after the war?’ Thelen nodded. ‘And worked as a driver for Engel Furniture?’
   ‘Only after Captain Engel asked me to.’
   ‘You were in contact with him the whole time?’
   ‘I thought he was dead until he got back in touch.’
   ‘How did he do that?’
   ‘By post. One morning there was a letter in my mailbox from a certain André Bonnechance, who addressed me asold friend and claimed his real name was Benjamin Engel. He had survived the boobytrap, and been dug out by English and French troops. I couldn’t believe it, but went to the address he provided, a lousy attic flat in Cologne, and saw the price he’d paid.’
   Time and again Thelen paused to attend to his cigarette or the road ahead.
   ‘Go on,’ Rath said.
   ‘Fate would have shown greater mercy in allowing him to die. He had to wear a prosthetic mask. Half his face was missing: an eye, part of his lower jaw. He could barely speak, and wrote most things down.’
   ‘How did you know it was him?’
   ‘Half a face is all you need to recognise a man, and he knew things about me that only Captain Engel could know.’
   ‘Such as?’
   ‘I’d rather not discuss it, Inspector. War, more than anything else, teaches you about your fellow man.’
   ‘He had changed his name?’
   ‘Not him, the French.’
   ‘I’m surprised they didn’t beat him to death. A Bosch, buried and barely alive in a German trench.’
   ‘The whole thing’s a miracle.’ Thelen’s eyes fixed on his in the rearview mirror. ‘Captain Engel couldn’t remember a thing when he wakened from his death-like state. He didn’t know who or where he was. Everyone around him spoke French, so when his voice returned he spoke it too. Perhaps they thought he was a French spy caught behind German lines, but they patched him up, gave him a new name and put him in a home for veterans. He remained there until the war ended, and that was the day he remembered. The gun salutes, the fireworks, all that racket around the armistice… brought it all back. The explosion, and everything that went before.’
   ‘You remember you’re a German soldier, only to find yourself in a home for French veterans.’
   ‘That was nothing beside his longing for his wife and family.’
   ‘Yet he hid himself in a garrett?’
   ‘He didn’t want them, didn’t wantanyone, to see him like that. Besides, his fate was already sealed.’
   ‘The shrapnel…’
   ‘The doctors in France gave him five years, but he lived almost ten. It was Eva who kept him alive, and it was for her sake that he didn’t make an end. Her and the children. He told me to apply for a driver’s job in the furniture store the first time we met. Sometimes I think it’s the only reason he got in touch with me.’
   ‘You were to keep an eye on his family?’
   ‘I visited him regularly to report back. He wanted to know every last detail. We would meet every Sunday.’
   ‘Did you reveal your identity to Eva or the children?’
   ‘Captain Engel didn’t want that under any circumstances, but things changed with inflation.’
   ‘Which is when he remembered the gold.’
   ‘What do you know about that?’
   ‘Whatever Achim von Roddeck writes in his memoirs.’
   ‘That’s only half the story, and it’s twisted at that, but you’re right. Engel knew where the gold was buried and briefed me on its location. It was the first I’d heard of it.’
   ‘This would be four or five years after the war? Why wait so long?’
   ‘Because it was no picnic. Even today the French are incredibly wary. All Germans require a visa, and you have to say where you are headed and why. Throw in a hoard of gold to be smuggled across the border, and you start to get a picture.’
   ‘But you had a plan.’
   ‘We needed to let his wife in on it first.’
   ‘You had to tell her he was alive…’
   ‘The captain still didn’t want her to see him, but they wrote almost every day.’
   ‘You were about to say how you got the gold back to Bonn.’
   ‘It was simple.’ Thelen’s eyes smiled in the rearview mirror. ‘We ordered furniture from a French factory near Cambrai and drove across the border in a big van. Captain Engel wasn’t certain we’d find the gold, but it was exactly where he’d described, albeit the forest was no more. Theboulder was the only thing spared by war.’
   ‘Who’s we?’
   ‘I took Walther with me. He was only sixteen, but capable. It was quite a business, in the dead of night, but we managed. We stowed the bars behind the furniture. No one noticed a thing.’
   Rath leaned back. So, Engel junior hadn’t told him the full story. ‘But these gold bars belonged to a French bank. They were embossed, weren’t they? How did you turn them into cash?’
   ‘Frau Engel has a banker friend who exchanged them into currency. Don’t ask me what he did with the bars. Probably had them melted, and stamped with his own seal. He’d be glad to top up his bank’s supplies.’
   ‘I don’t understand,’ Rath said. ‘Eva Heinen, Engel as she was, experiences this great miracle of her husband’s survival, but shortly after has him declared dead. Why?’
   ‘It’s how the captain wanted it. She was to bury Benjamin Engel along with his name.’
   ‘As well as rebrand the store.’
   ‘Bearing in mind what happened two weeks ago with the boycott, it was the correct decision. Knowing he was alive made it easier for her to declare him dead. The only thing she and the boy found hard was that they still couldn’t see him. No one knew his address. I took care of his errands and whatever else he needed.’
   ‘Then you had two jobs: van driverand orderly.’
   Thelen’s eyes flashed in the rearview mirror. ‘It was friendship. It might be hard for someone like you to understand, but that’s how it was.’
   ‘So, why the hide-and-seek? Why the false name? Because he wanted to spare his wife the sight of a crippled veteran?’
   ‘No.’ Thelen shook his head. ‘Benjamin Engel was certain he’d survived an assassination attempt. The explosion was no accident.’
   ‘An unloved superior, murdered by his unit. Just like Grimberg said.’
   ‘Grimberg? The demolition expert? You spoke to him?’
   ‘Didn’t Frau Heinen mention it?’
   ‘I must say I’m surprised. It was Grimberg who detonated the charge.’
   ‘I thought he was with you when the trap went off? He could have been killed himself.’
   ‘He knewexactly where he was when it happened. Apart from the shock wave we were both unscathed.’
   ‘Why didn’t you report him at the time?’
   ‘Because I didn’t know! I believed what he told me. He was the expert. He even came with me to look for the captain. It was only when the artillery fire became heavier that we called it off. How was I to know he was behind it?’
   ‘Sounds pretty naive to me.’
   ‘The pot calling the kettle black!’
   Thelen was right. Rath, too, had been duped by the demolition expert.
   ‘It all seems so obvious in retrospect,’ Thelen continued. ‘We got out of the car, and Grimberg crouched in front of a bush to the side. I thought it was strange at the time, carrying on like that. He was only tying his laces. Anyway, the captain pressed ahead.’
   ‘Let me guess: Grimberg told you exactly where to park.’
   ‘I didn’t think anything of it. He was the one with local knowledge, and who’d planted the traps. Now, of course, I see why I had to park there, and why he crouched on the floor. The detonator was hidden behind the bush. Roddeck must have put him up to it during the night.’
   ‘What did Roddeck have against your captain?’
   ‘He didn’t like him, which perhaps made it easier, but the real reason was that he and his men were afraid of being turned in. The captain didn’t want to leave the gold. He wanted to get it behind German lines and claim it as spoils of war.’
   ‘Why didn’t they just blackmail him? He had shot three men, including a recruit from his own unit.’
   ‘You shouldn’t believe everything Achim von Roddeck says. Much less everything he writes.’ The eyes in the rearview mirror looked at Rath. ‘My captain was no saint, Inspector, but he was no killer either.’
   ‘What happened that night?’
   ‘Inspector, I wasn’t there.’
   They were approaching the Spree. The dark building of the Märkisches Museum loomed on the horizon. Rath flicked his cigarette out of the window. ‘I don’t understand it,’ he said. ‘What was Engel doing, climbing into the trench alone like that? Didn’t he see he might be in danger?’
   ‘Why would he? He didn’t know Grimberg was one of those wanting to conceal the gold. The man wasn’t even there when they buried it.’
   ‘Engel could have turned them all in to the field police.’
   ‘He was going to, but the police were behind the Hindenburg Line. We were the last of the Mohicans! The rearguard.’ Thelen’s eyes looked for Rath’s in the rearview mirror. ‘Our retreat was to begin that morning. Operation Alberich was on a tight schedule, and Benjamin Engel was a dutiful captain. He had no intention of jeopardising the operation and risking people’s lives all because of a dishonourable troop of soldiers. They’d get their just deserts soon enough.’
   ‘Things never got that far.’
   ‘No.’ Thelen shook his head. ‘If he’d told me what happened that night, I’d have been more wary. Perhaps I’d have noticed that something with Grimberg wasn’t right.’
   ‘And he has the nerve to play the innocent. He didn’t have much good to say about Roddeck, but I’d never have guessed the pair were in cahoots.’
   ‘That’s my story, Inspector. Do what you can with it.’
   ‘The only way I can do anything is if you sign a statement and repeat it in a court of law.’
   ‘I’m not about to renounce my new life.’
   ‘I know,’ Rath said. ‘Thank you all the same.’
   They arrived at police headquarters, but Rath directed Thelen towards Dircksenstrasse, where the Buick was parked. Thelen turned around and Rath thought he might ask for his fare after all.
   ‘Inspector, before you go… There’s something else I need to tell you. Roddeck’s novel, this whole series of murders…’
   ‘Yes?’
   ‘I’m partly to blame. I saw Roddeck again about a year ago, in the Hotel Eden, where I was attending a tea-dance with my wife.’
   ‘You’re married?’
   ‘My wife married Erich Heintze, not Franz Thelen. She’s part of my new life, not my old.’
   ‘You only changed your name a few years ago. Why?’
   ‘Because I began to think I might be in danger too. I left the Rhineland to start afresh in Berlin with a new name and some money from Frau Engel. I couldn’t have known that others would do the same. People I had no wish to see again.’
   ‘You saw Roddeck. Did he recognise you?’
   ‘I don’t think so. He was entirely occupied with his lady friend, and not just on the dancefloor. I pretended to be ill, and Elli and I left.’
   ‘Then nothing happened?’
   ‘On the contrary.’ Thelen gave an embarrassed smile. ‘I wrote him a letter. Just like that: Hotel Eden, care of Achim von Roddeck.’
   ‘What sort of letter.’
   ‘I rubbed the whole story from back then in his face. Told him he could write off the gold, and that the truth always finds a way. I wanted to spite him, do you understand? Put fear in him. He was strutting about the place… no guilty conscience, no shame. I had to.’
   ‘You risked your anonymity… to frighten him?’
   ‘That’s just it. I didn’t write the letter inmy name.’ Franz Thelen hunched his shoulders as if to apologise.‘I wrote it as Benjamin Engel.’
   98
   Fritze sat at the breakfast table, eating a cheese sandwich and reading theVossische funny papers. Charly was happy he was at least reading something. It was high time, school was starting soon, but he was making good progress.
   ‘Listen,’ he said. ‘I have to read this out. In… Halberstadt a man calls a boy to the window of his… coupé: Get me a pair of… Halberstädter… sausages. Here’s a mark, buy yourself a pair too as a… reward. The rascal hast… hastens away and returns with both cheeks bulging. Here’s fifty pfennig back – I got the last two.’
   He delivered the punchline without looking. Even Gereon had to smile.
   She was starting to feel as if he’d made his peace with the situation. At Easter they had hidden a few eggs for the boy, and felt almost like a little family. Sunday afternoon they had strolled in glorious sunshine, and visited Johann Marlow’s house at Freienwalde next day. Hannah was making astounding progress. It wasn’t just the speed at which her wounds were healing. Even more astounding was her conversation, albeit she still found it difficult to talk about her past, the Crow’s Nest and her childhood.
   ‘It was my old life I was torching,’ she had said, more to herself than to Charly, her first and only explanation for her terrible crime.
   Charly still didn’t know what would become of her. She couldn’t let the state authorities near her again, but what was the alternative? They could hardly take her in at Carmerstrasse, a fugitive killer from the asylum. Hannah didn’t just need a new future, like Fritze, she needed a new past: a new life and a new name.
   She had asked Gereon if Marlow could obtain false papers, and how much it might cost, but he looked at her wide-eyed before shaking his head. Next thing she knew he had withdrawn to Marlow’s office.
   In the meantime, she had come to appreciate the gangster more. The armed guards told a different story, but Marlow himself was exceptionally polite and there was something touching about the way he cared for Hannah. He had even given her a present for Easter.
   She was wondering if there might be room for a fourth person at the breakfast table when Gereon stood up.‘Time I was on my way. Want me to drive you?’
   ‘Yes,’ she said firmly, and half an hour later was strolling down the corridors of G Division towards Friederike Wieking’s office. She felt like a stranger. Even the once familiar smell of tea and dust was alien. She took a deep breath and knocked. Yes, her mind was made up.
   ‘Do you have an appointment?’ the superintendent’s secretary looked at her over the rim of her glasses.
   ‘No, but it’s important, I…’
   ‘If you don’t have an appointment, I’m afraid I can’t let you through.’
   The door to the office opened and Friederike Wieking emerged, furrowing her brow.‘Fräulein Ritter! Fancy seeing you here.’
   ‘Good morning, ma’am. I wanted to speak with you briefly, if I may.’
   ‘Your timing is perfect. We have a lot to discuss.’
   Charly thought she saw disappointment in the secretary’s face as she took her seat on the visitor’s chair.
   ‘This conversation ought to have taken place long before now.’ Wieking gazed at her sternly from behind her desk. ‘Fräulein Ritter, have you considered whether you possess the necessary moral fibre and work ethic to be a member of the WKP?’
   ‘I’m not sure what you’re driving at, ma’am.’
   ‘Let’s take your sense of duty as a starting point. Can it be that you feel moredrawn to working in A Division, for example?’
   ‘Superintendent Gennat has requested my involvement in two cases. My former colleagues value my work.’
   ‘One in particular seems to value your contribution. I’m not talking about your official forays into Homicide, although I wish you showed the same enthusiasm for your work here. No, my problem is that you have been seen in Homicide on several occasions during the working day, leaving your colleague to cope by herself forhours while you stop by your fiancé’s office. God alone knows what you’ve been doing there!’ With each sentence Wieking’s voice grew louder. Had Karin van Almsick squealed? Perhaps, but there must be someone in Homicide who couldn’t keep quiet either. ‘As if that wasn’t enough,’ Wieking continued, ‘you absent yourself from duty for weeks…’
   ‘I was sick!’
   ‘Sick!’ Wieking practically spat out the word. ‘Apsychological illness! I’m sorry, but I can do without all this Jew whining.’
   ‘This what?’
   ‘Paroxysmal Neurasthenia.’ Wieking made it sound like the Latin name for a slimy toad. ‘You do realise the doctor who diagnosed you is Jewish? They link everything to the psyche.’
   Yes, Charly realised that Dieter was Jewish. He made nothing of it and she had never thought it significant.‘You’re questioning Dr Wolff’s qualifications?’
   ‘What I’mquestioning is your willingness to take part in the national-socialist revolution.’
   The national-socialist revolution… What had started as the national concentration had morphed into the national uprising, then the national revolution. Now it was anational-socialist revolution. Terms that were in constant flux, and no sooner did they arise than they appeared in the written press. This was the pace of change in the new Germany. For her part, Charly believed that the old Germany still existed somewhere. The country she loved couldn’t have dissolved into thin air. ‘Pardon me, ma’am, but I’m not a National Socialist,’ she said.
   ‘You don’t have to be a party member, child. But you’re a German, and the fate of our country must matter to you!’ Friederike Wieking sounded like a headmistress refusing to give up on her student.
   ‘Of course it does.’
   ‘There you are, and you can’t just leave your colleagues in the lurch! God knows, we have enough on our plates. Especiallyhere, charged with looking after the nation’s young. Our youth is our future.’
   ‘Perhaps I have different ideas about the nature of our work here. And our future.’
   ‘Then it’s time you reconsidered. In a people’s community everyone must pull together. It starts on a small scale, with family, and work, and expands into something greater. Think about that.’
   ‘I’ve given it thought, ma’am. It’s the reason I’m here today. I’ve come to realise that police work is not for me.’
   How hard it was to say these words. They weren’t true, or at least were only half the story.I can no longer be a police officer for this state, which tramples over our every legal right, was what she meant, but being seen as an intractable supporter of the Republic could create problems for Gereon.
   ‘Might you change your mind?’ Wieking hadn’t been expecting this. Charly had taken the wind out of her sails. ‘You have done excellent work here, on the rare occasion you have seen fit, that is.’
   ‘My decision is final, and I will confirm it in writing, ma’am.’
   ‘That won’t be necessary.’ Wieking’s maternal mask slipped. ‘I think I’ve heard enough. Your probationary service is terminated with immediate effect. Pack your things. I don’t want to see you here again. You will be paid until the end of the month.’
   ‘If that is all.’
   ‘That is all. Heil Hitler.’
   99
   Berthold Weinert felt uneasy. It wasn’t the first time Gereon Rath had dragged him to theNasse Dreieck on Wassertorplatz, and he had never liked the place: too small, too smoky, too Kreuzberg. Looking at the bar and four tables, he realised he was the only journalist present just as, clearly, Gereon was the only police officer. Better to meet here than be surrounded by colleagues in the newspaper quarter, or at Alex where every third drinker was a hoodlum or a cop. The only person who paid them any heed in theDreieck was the landlord, Schorsch, and he had eyes only for their beer glasses.
   The things he did for information. Gereon had been playing hard to get for months but, after his enigmatic appearance at the press conference, Weinert knew he had to talk to him. Schorsch set down two fresh glasses.
   ‘Back on your feet, I see,’ Gereon said.
   ‘Since the Reichstag fire. Holiday cover at first, but after the elections the man extended his leave indefinitely. Right now he’s in Prague, and won’t return.’
   ‘You’re keeping his desk warm?’
   ‘An editor again, at last. What did you have to tell me?’
   ‘What if I said the dead man from the Spree isn’t Captain Engel, but someone else?’
   Ten minutes later Weinert had heard a hair-raising story he would not have believed if it hadn’t come from Gereon Rath.
   ‘Engel isn’t dead?’
   ‘The corpse from the Spree still had its foreskin. Engel was circumcised eight days after his birth, in December 1883.’
   ‘So who is it?’
   Gereon shrugged.‘Pathology swept it under the carpet to avoid making a fool of the commissioner.’
   Weinert shook his head.‘Is that why they took you off the case?’
   ‘The commissioner took me off the case because I wasinvestigating it, rather than hunting Benjamin Engel. What if I told you it isn’t Engel, but Lieutenant von Roddeck who’s behind the killings?’
   ‘He doesn’t fit the profile. Besides, they found the murder weapon.’
   ‘You think Roddeck’s going to drive a trench dagger into someone’s skull? That’s what his faithful Heinrich is for.’
   ‘His who?’
   ‘Heinrich Wosniak. Any money he’s the dead man from the Spree. The burns aren’t from a boobytrap in ’17, but a fire on New Year’s Eve ’31.’
   ‘Wosniak? Then he’ll have the other tramp on his conscience too?’
   ‘He gave him his coat before killing him. The pocket still contained Wosniak’s service record so everyone thought it was him.’
   ‘Why should he murder all these men? His former comrades?’
   ‘Only Achim von Roddeck can answer that. You should ask him sometime.’
   ‘Not likely. That’s up to the police, or is Roddeck so untouchable that…’ Weinert broke off in mid-sentence. Having signalled for him to be quiet, Gereon looked towards the entrance. Weinert turned to see that a blond SA officer had entered with a man in civilian clothes. Both seemed known here. The civilian raised his hand uncertainly in their direction. Gereon replied with a nod.
   ‘Who’s that?’ Weinert asked, thinking he recognised the civilian.
   ‘A colleague,’ Gereon whispered. ‘Give Schorsch a fiver and let’s be on our way.’
   The blinds on the glass door of the senior duty editor’s office were down, as usual, but a light burned inside. Hiding away like this, chances were Hefner’s mood wasn’t great. Weinert knocked on the glass and a droning sound came from within. With a little imagination, it might have been anenter.
   Harald Hefner’s long, thin body was folded behind a desk that appeared much too small, partly on account of its owner, partly on account of the reams of papers spilling everywhere. The universe must have looked something like this before the Earth was created but, with a kind of somnambulistic self-confidence, Hefner knew exactly where to find whatever he needed, forging a new, printed world from the chaos each day.
   ‘Where have you been, Weinert? I’ve been looking for you. You have the honour of putting together Hitler’s birthday edition, but you’ll need to get a move on or the man will be forty-five before we get anything in print.’
   ‘The amount we’ve published you’d have to be illiterate not to know evenhe gets older each year.’ Hefner screwed up his face. ‘All right,’ Weinert conceded. ‘I’d be glad to, but first I want to tell you why I was late. I was meeting an informant. The Alberich murders…’
   ‘That’s old hat.’
   ‘What if I told you Benjamin Engel isn’t responsible.’
   Harald Hefner reached for his cigar box, fished one out and offered one.‘Ten minutes,’ he said, cutting off the tip.
   Weinert was done in seven when the duty editor thundered:‘Are you telling me everything we… everythingyou wrote last week, was rot?’
   ‘It came from police headquarters’s official statement. The commissioner spoke at the press conference himself.’
   ‘The police commissioner, Herr Weinert, is an upstanding National Socialist. Our paper is not about to take a stance against the national-socialist revolution.’
   ‘It doesn’t have to. Just against sloppy police work.’
   Hefner drew on his cigar and considered, the old-school journalist in him battling against the editor obliged to conform with Goebbels’s wishes.
   ‘Perhaps…’ he muttered at length, ‘…you can bring Isidor Weiss into it as the man responsible for thissloppy police work.’ A jolt passed through Hefner’s body and he pounded his fist on the table. ‘But, not right now. Right now, you need to take care of this!’
   He pushed across a press release with the letterhead of the NSDAP Reich Chief Press Officer. Weinert skimmed the text, written by Otto Dietrich himself: a gushing tribute to the birthday boy who, tomorrow, would celebrate the culmination of his forty-fourth year, and in whose honour every German paper was publishing a slew of articles. Last year Hitler’s birthday hadn’t even made theAngriff, although back then the Nazi paper might still have been banned. Now, in emotive language, Dietrich outlined everything that had happened since. The Führer’sKampfjahr, or year of struggle had been, without question, an eventful twelve months.
   ‘One more thing…’ Weinert turned around at the door. ‘I want to read your Alberich article before anyone else. You understand? Not a word about it in the meantime.’
   ‘Of course.’
   ‘You make inquiries at your own risk. If you should tread on the wrong people’s toes I know nothing. Clear?’
   Weinert nodded and left the office. It was better than nothing. At least for a few days he could feel like a real journalist again.
   100
   Grey clouds hung oppressively over the city. Rath sat in his office, gazing across Reinhold Gräf’s abandoned desk and fiddling with a pencil. The file on his desk ought to have interested him, but didn’t. Another unexplained death, probably a suicide. Three years ago, when share prices hit rock bottom, suicides had boomed. People had ruined themselves through speculation, these days political ruin was to blame.
   Here, at last, was a case that made sense and might actually lead to a result, unlike the ridiculous task of finding a link between Ohligs Cabinetmakers and the Rheinisches Möbelhaus. The Alberich file was as good as closed and, according to Gräf, the only thing left was the hunt for Wosniak. Still, Rath couldn’t focus.
   He could have spoken up at morning briefing, voiced some doubt, shaken Gräf and Steinke out of their self-satisfaction, but hadn’t and now it was too late, the case was gone. He would have to speak with Gennat to get it reopened, but what could he say without dragging Dr Schwartz or himself into it? For Buddha, it was enough to know the killer was out of action, whoever was responsible for his death.
   It was five or six days since he’d met Weinert, butDer Tag still hadn’t published anything on the Alberich case, let alone the article he’d been expecting. Nothing was happening, his hands were tied, and what could he do with facts that couldn’t be corroborated? Whatever he had on Roddeck was either inadmissible in court or easily challenged by a lawyer. It was as if the case were jinxed, and it had started to weigh on his soul. Like the sky above: impassive, grey, and immovable.
   More and more he understood Charly’s indignation, and was beginning to dread his work at the Castle. For someone who hated and avoided everything political, the place had grown unbearable.
   Ernst Gennat seemed to feel likewise, refusing to bow and scrape to the commissioner like so many others. The leader and founder of A Division was a living legend and it would be easier to send Grzesinski or Bernhard Weiss packing than Buddha. While the world erupted around him he ensured that things carried on as before. Even so, the atmosphere in Homicide had changed. Suspicion and mistrust were everywhere, and the fate of Wilhelm Böhm had shown where denunciation could lead.
   Rath looked out of the window. Nothing was happening. Things couldn’t go on like this, he had to do something. He opened the door to the outer office. ‘Erika! Take a trip to Registry and see what you can find out about…’ He looked in the file, still not having internalised the name of the potential suicide. ‘…Herr Ruland, Ferdinand, who last resided inDerfflingerstrasse, Tiergarten.’
   He waited until she had left the office before reaching for the telephone, and two minutes later had arranged a lunchtime meeting. He had just hung up and was fiddling with his pencil again when there was a knock at the door. It was always the same, the moment Erika Voss left the office. Before he could shoutEnter! the door opened.
   Reinhold Gräf cast Erika Voss’s abandoned desk a brief, almost startled glance, and crossed the outer office, a cardboard box under his arm. ‘Hello Gereon. Hope I’m not interrupting?’
   ‘Moving back in?’
   Gräf began clearing his desk. ‘On the contrary. I’m moving out for good. You’re getting a new colleague.’
   ‘No one said anything to me.’
   ‘Gennat didn’t want to shout it from the rooftops. Lange is returning from 1A. Steinke and I are leaving A Division in exchange.’
   ‘You’re joining the Politicals? Permanently?’
   ‘Apparently Diels requested me himself. The Political Police need more officers, he said, and they could use a man like me. Levetzow said a promotion’s in the offing if I agree.’
   ‘All these years you’ve refused to put yourself up for inspector and now…?’
   ‘It looks like they’re prepared to waive my probationary year.’
   ‘A thank-you for the Alberich case? Congratulations.’
   Gräf looked at the floor, as if embarrassed. ‘I was lucky, Gereon, that’s all. That Engel’s corpse turned up, I mean.’
   ‘You don’t know how he was killed yet?’
   ‘Probably self-defence. Despite numerous appeals, Wosniak still hasn’t made contact.’
   ‘Perhaps he doesn’t read the newspapers. Is there really no sign though? At the start of the investigation you spent some time scouring the homeless shelters in Berlin.’
   Gräf shook his head. ‘That’s the thing. All that looking in Berlin, but he skipped town after the fire, and returned home. We’ve had word from the homeless shelter in Barmen. Our colleagues there are taking up the search.’
   ‘Barmen?’
   ‘You know, the suspension monorail. It’s called Wuppertal now.’
   ‘I know.’
   Rath’s mind was awash with thoughts he couldn’t quite grasp. A flat in Elberfeld, the rumble of the suspension monorail outside the window, people sitting on board and looking inside the flat. The face of Friedrich Grimberg as he recounted his story.
   ‘Anyway,’ Gräf continued, ‘the Alberich file is closed. This morning was my last time in front of Gennat and the rest.’
   Though relieved at no longer having to explain why their friendship had waned, a melancholy feeling rose when Rath remembered the years they had spent in this office, when things between them were good. Gräf’s departure meant the start of a new era here in the Castle too. Still, Homicide would be Homicide for as long as coffee and cake were served on the worn green of Gennat’s upholstered suite. Even without Gräf. Even without Böhm. Even without Charly.
   ‘The Politicals,’ Rath said. ‘I’d never have thought…’
   ‘Gereon, it’s not like it used to be. There are more opportunities now. We can really achieve something.’
   ‘In 1A? The only place police work could be less meaningful is Women’s CID.’
   ‘We’re helping to build a new Germany. Don’t you see? A country you can be proud of. A country worth living for.’
   ‘Worth dying for, too?’
   ‘Let’s not talk politics, Gereon. It never leads anywhere.’
   ‘Which isprecisely why I wouldn’t want to work for your new colleagues. One week with Detective Zientek was enough.’
   ‘Each to their own.’ Gräf closed the cardboard box which he had by now filled.
   ‘Where are you going? Back to Bülowplatz, or are you staying in the Castle?’
   ‘The Castle is too small for the State Police. We’re moving into new offices. They’ve cleared the School of Applied Arts for us.’
   ‘The School of Applied Arts?’
   ‘On Prinz-Albrecht-Strasse.’ Gräf had stopped at the outer office. ‘What were you doing in theDreieck last week?’
   It seemed like Reinhold was a perfect fit for the Politicals.‘I was in the neighbourhood,’ Rath said, ‘and I thought, why not pop in on Schorsch. I was in a bit of a rush, otherwise I might have come past.’
   ‘You were through the door as soon as I arrived. Who were you speaking to?’
   ‘Someone I know from before. I forget the name. It was just a quick beer.’ Rath looked at Gräf. ‘How about you? You seem to be out with your neighbour an awful lot these days.’
   Gräf looked as if he might turn red, but he was no Andreas Lange. ‘Ifyou’re not going to stop by…’ he said at length. ‘I have to drink with someone.’
   Even if it’s a queer Nazi, Rath thought.
   ‘What would you have done,’ he asked his former colleague, in a final, weary attempt, ‘if the dead man from the Spree hadn’t been Engel?’
   ‘Thank God it was,’ Gräf said with a shrug, and heaved his box out the door.
   101
   They didn’t meet in one of the usual places by Alex, but in the Tietz department store restaurant.
   ‘A few weeks ago we’d have been threatened by the SA for setting foot in here,’ Rath said.
   ‘Everything’s back to normal,’ said Weinert. ‘You don’t seriously think Berliners will let their department stores be taken away, no matter how much the Nazis might rail against…’ Weinert broke off as the waiter approached.
   ‘My shout,’ Rath said.
   ‘Which means you want something from me,’ said Weinert.
   ‘What I really want is information.’
   ‘There’s a turn up for the books.’
   ‘What’s the latest on your article?’
   ‘What article?’
   ‘What article? The Alberich case.’
   ‘I see. I thoughtyou were doingme a favour, when really it’s the other way round.’
   ‘Wasn’t it ever thus?’ The waiter arrived, and they ordered. ‘Anyway, I hope you can make something of the information I gave you.’
   ‘It isn’t as easy as all that, Gereon, not these days.’ Weinert lowered his voice. ‘Once upon a time an article like that might have forced the commissioner to resign. Now it creates life-threatening problems for its author.’
   ‘I don’t care about the commissioner if it creates problems for Achim von Roddeck.’
   ‘The commissioner is still going to look foolish. Even if I don’t have any evidence, just you as my source.’
   ‘You keep me out of it. I thought that was clear. We’re talking about confidential information!’
   ‘Then who do I credit as my source?’
   ‘What about “well-informed circles”?’
   ‘Believe me, Gereon, if your commissioner wants to know my source he’ll find out. A troop of SA auxiliaries will take me into custody and won’t stop until I tell them what they want to hear.’
   The waiter came with the drinks, and they were silent for a time.
   ‘Give them Gräf,’ Rath said, when the waiter was out of earshot. ‘He was in the Dreieck that night.’
   ‘So were you. We were standing together at the bar.’
   ‘So what? How amI supposed to know anything? It’s far more likely that Gräf does. He was there at the beginning, when Böhm was still investigating. It’s more his case than mine.’
   Weinert looked wary.‘You’re quick to shop your colleagues.’
   ‘I want the truth to come out.’
   ‘Then you should vouch for it yourself.’
   ‘You still owe me one!’
   ‘That business with Charly and the pigeon shit? That’s done and dusted, or have you forgotten my article on the murdering Jewish captain? The one that got you re-assigned to the case in the first place? It isn’t my fault the commissioner took you off it again.’
   ‘That stuff about a wicked, murdering Jew was a pack of lies. Don’t you want to set things straight?’
   ‘You’ve some nerve, Gereon. First you tell me apack of lies, then you blame me for believing it!’
   ‘I believed it myself then,’ Rath lied, ‘but things have changed, and it’s for us to set the record straight.’
   ‘It’s not that I don’twant to write it. It’s just that the story will die a death before the public get anywhere near it.’ He lowered his voice. ‘Hefner wants me to pin the blame on Isidor Weiss, which I could do, at a pinch, if Weiss hadn’t been out for almost a year. So, what’s my angle?’
   The waiter served the food. Rath had chosen not to follow Weinert’s lead, and ordered rump steak with chips and a glass of white wine. Straight away he ordered another glass. Returning to his office three glasses of wine and forty-five minutes later, he found Erika Voss already seated behind her desk.
   ‘Someone to see you, Sir,’ she said, nodding to the side.
   A man sat on the visitor’s chair in the outer office, head bowed and folding his hat. Rath couldn’t hide his surprise. ‘Ede!’ he said. ‘What are you doing in Berlin?’
   ‘A promise is a promise, Inspector.’
   Erika Voss watched with curiosity as Rath guided Eduard Schürmann into his office and shut the door.
   ‘Nice view you’ve got here, Inspector,’ Ede said, looking out of the window.
   ‘The court building?’
   Ede rummaged in his coat pocket.‘You shouldn’t have said that stuff about the SA in my shop. I can understand a man being suspicious, but the SA… Inspector, that lot are no joke.’ He fished a crumpled note out of his pocket. ‘You can trust old Ede. No need for threats, or the SA and their auxiliary police.’ He unfolded the note and handed it to Rath. ‘Fifty marks! Here they are.’
   Rath hadn’t taken Ede’s promise seriously, putting it down to the man’s chronic fear of the SA. Yet it was precisely this fear that had compelled the notorious pickpocket to visit Berlin Police Headquarters of his own accord. Rath examined the note. The watermark looked genuine.
   ‘What about interest?’ Rath asked. ‘This was months ago.’
   Ede’s eyes opened wide. ‘Inspector, it’s a lot of money as it is.’
   ‘All right. It was good of you to stop by.’
   ‘Cologners have to stick together.’
   ‘Right.’ Rath stowed the money. ‘Just promise no relapses, even if you get an itch.’
   ‘Course, Inspector, course. You think a man like me acts the whiz of his own accord? These days your jack can be long gone and the fuzz still bring you in. They don’t need evidence anymore.’
   Ede Schürmann was outraged. Once upon a time it had been tricky to move against a pickpocket. Experts like Ede would operate as part of a trio. The jostler distracted the victim by shoving or colliding into him, before, quick as a flash, the whiz worked his sleight of hand and passed the spoils to the jack, who carried them away. Even if the victim realised their wallet was missing straight away, nothing could be done. Neither the jostler nor the whiz would be carrying the stolen item, and the police would be forced to release them. These days the need for evidence was lost on the police, and the SA most of all.
   Rath felt uneasy thinking about it and, for the second time that day, the suspension monorail flashed through his mind. Grimberg. Wosniak. Roddeck. Jostler, whiz, and jack. Before he could finish the thought, however, there was a knock and Erika Voss poked her head through the crack in the door.
   ‘Apologies for interrupting, Sir, but we have another visitor. Or rather, an addition.’
   She opened the door to reveal Andreas Lange wearing an embarrassed smile. In his hand was a cardboard box identical to the one Gräf had filled that morning. Only, Lange’s was chock full with papers and other junk.
   ‘Lange!’
   Andreas Lange had worked in Homicide before putting himself up for inspector.‘Sorry, Sir. I thought someone would have told you.’
   ‘Someone did, after a fashion,’ Rath said. ‘Come in, Lange. My guest was just leaving.’
   Ede took the hint.‘If there’s anything else, I’ll be at the Hotel Alhambra.’
   ‘What was all that about, Sir?’ Lange asked after Ede had bowed backwards through the door.
   ‘An old acquaintance, from Cologne.’
   So, this was his new partner. A good man. An ambitious man. More ambitious than Gräf. Hopefully not too ambitious. ‘Do you know what a whiz is, Lange?’
   ‘Should I?’
   ‘Not in Homicide.’ Rath pointed to Gräf’s old desk. ‘Welcome back to A Division. Word is you came to regret your political sojourn.’
   ‘Like you, Sir. Am I right?’ Lange tried to sound flippant but his eyes told a different story.
   ‘Just like me. No politics here. In this office we work unexplained deaths.’ He stretched out a hand. ‘Here’s to a successful partnership!’
   Lange cleared his things into Gräf’s old desk while Rath returned to his pencil, and gazed out of the window. The greyness over the court building was slightly brighter. The sky still seemed leaden and immovable, but it wasn’t. It was moving, as it always had, and always would. Everything was in a state of flux. Everything, and suddenly Rath finished the thought he had started that morning.
   The jostler, the whiz, the jack. You just had to know which one was which, then it was obvious…
   102
   The sky was almost cloudless, the weather ideal. Grimberg’s gaze wandered beyond man-made cliffs carved out of limestone to the narrow stacks of the Dornap ring oven. It was time to sound the warning horn. Most workers had already sought cover, but he could make out three stragglers including the shift supervisor.
   How gratifying to see battle-hardened men flee, just as they had in the war, and the same man in control of them. Himself, Friedrich Grimberg.
   Without him no one would have dared to bury the gold. Roddeck would have transported it behind the Siegfried Line next morning as Captain Engel had instructed. Grimberg despised the lieutenant as a pretty boy utterly unworthy of being his superior officer. In the years he had known him, never once had Achim von Roddeck proved to be what he claimed, neither soldier, officer, nor socialite. What he understood best was how to inhabit a role. He was an actor, and his latest persona of author was no different. It was scarcely credible that his so-called writings had struck gold.
   It was a panicked Roddeck who had called him in Elberfeld nine months earlier and harangued him almost every day since, his noble heart in his mouth because a man had risen from the grave. He had received a letter from Benjamin Engel, and there was no doubting it was genuine. Engel, the captain whom the world and his wife thought was dead, hinted that he knew what they had done all those years ago. It had taken a lot of words to calm Roddeck; to make him see the letter as their final chance at the gold.
   Grimberg looked again at the quarry. The danger zone was clear. He sounded the horn for a second time, and only then connected the ignition wires to the blasting machine. Misfires could be fatal, and in the course of his long career Friedrich Grimberg could honestly say he had never been responsible for one. Not even during the war.
   It had almost physically pained him to read the wordmisfire in the official investigation notes, even if it was only one possible explanation for Captain Engel’s failure to return from his inspection rounds. British artillery fire, or a stray animal, a rat perhaps or a pigeon, were the others. Wilful destruction didn’t figure anywhere in the report. Even so, as many as half the unit suspected a ruse to get rid of an unpopular captain, including the men present at the gold strike, most of whom would die in action before the year was out.
   Lieutenant von Roddeck had been hard on his troops in the remaining eighteen months of war. As Grimberg hammered home to his eternally dithering superior:the fewer men that survive, the more there will be for us. The scattered band of soldiers who, after years in jail, or in the service of some volunteer corps or other, had come together in the former Alberich territory to collect their spoils, had amounted to just five men. Of these five, only three remained. Roddeck, Wosniak and Grimberg himself.
   He and Heinrich had lost touch following the abortive recovery mission, and God knows his friend had suffered in the intervening years. Having failed to find his fortune in Berlin, Heinrich had been forced to eke out his existence as a beggar and almost burned to death in a dilapidated old shack before deciding to return home.
   At first Grimberg didn’t recognise the tramp on the suspension monorail, from whose face the other passengers turned away. When this poor man in the soldier’s coat, a painful reminder of Germany’s collective misfortune, staggered towards him, he assumed it was for money, but moments later they reunited under the wary gaze of their fellow passengers.
   Heinrich found accommodation in Barmen, where he fared much better than in Berlin. Grimberg offered him the odd shift in the quarry, where working as a day labourer helped him keep his head above water. Though nothing permanent could come of it they would discuss old times, and the dreams which had vanished with the French gold. Then, out of nowhere, Achim von Roddeck had called and, kitted out with new clothes and spending money, Heinrich Wosniak set forth for the imperial capital once more.
   With everything wired, Grimberg gazed for a final time at the solid limestone wall, pressed down the lever and began counting slowly backwards to the explosion. Some blasters put cotton wool in their ears, but not him. He wanted to hear and see everything. The moment it all came crashing down was the moment he spent his days working towards and that he loved. For the tiniest fraction of a second it looked as if the solid mass of rock face were about to topple forward in its immensity, only for it to crumble into the valley, leaving a trail of dust.
   Grimberg sounded three short beeps for the all-clear, and watched the men emerging from the hut or from behind a dump truck, where they had gathered to watch. He pulled out the cable and wound it up. Paid by the cubic metre, he could finish as soon as he had packed.
   He dragged the machine down the slope. From the quarry to the suspension monorail in Vohwinkel was about twenty minutes’ walk. He could be home in an hour, but had barely been able to stand living with Käthe since his dreams had risen from the ashes. Even less since they had diminished again. Nearing the hut he was met by his excitable assistant, Jüppchen. ‘Come quickly, boss. Telephone for you. Trunk call from Berlin.’
   At last! When had he last taken a call from the capital? It must have been when Roddeck got himself worked up about this police inspector, thinking he was suspected of murder because he had been asked for his alibi.
   Wosniak had furnished the Herr Lieutenant with theperfect alibi. As far as Grimberg recalled, the taciturn report,‘the Huguenot is gone’, was the last sign of life he had from his faithful Heinrich, in a brief telephone call weeks earlier from Magdeburg train station. And so, when two police officers had informed him that Engel, the murdering Jew, had been found dead, and he need no longer be concerned forhis safety, he wondered what might have happened. Roddeck, for his part, appeared to be avoiding him.
   He set down the blasting machine, took the dusty receiver from Jüppchen’s hand, and casually announced himself. ‘Grimberg.’
   ‘Rath here. Detective Inspector Rath. You remember?’
   There was no concealing his disappointment.‘I remember. The dead homeless man.’
   ‘The dead homeless man whowasn’t Heinrich Wosniak. I wasn’t certain you’d been informed.’
   ‘It was in the paper.’ What did the man want from him? He wondered as Jüppchen left.
   ‘That’s just it, the whole thing is a little… delicate. I wouldn’t have called if you hadn’t made such a good impression when we spoke last time. Can I assume you’ll keep what I’m about to say between us?’
   ‘If that’s how it has to be.’
   ‘It concerns the reliability of your former lieutenant, Achim von Roddeck.’
   ‘I’m not sure I follow, Inspector.’
   ‘Then let me explain.’ The inspector cleared his throat. ‘The thing is… Herr Grimberg, it wasAchim von Roddeck who mistakenly identified the corpse of a homeless man as Heinrich Wosniak.’
   ‘I’m aware of that.’
   ‘Of course, but now doubts have started to arise concerning the identity of asecond dead man, likewise identified by Lieutenant Roddeck.’ The inspector paused as if embarrassed. ‘Perhaps you read about that as well. A few weeks ago we found a corpse in the Spree, to whom the murders of your war comrades can, beyond any doubt, be attributed.’
   ‘It was Captain Engel. Your colleagues in Elberfeld told me.’
   ‘Well, that’s just it. Whether the dead man is, in fact, Captain Engel… Herr Grimberg, forgive my indiscretion. As you know Captain Engel was a baptised Jew. Can you tell me if he was circumcised?’
   ‘I beg your pardon?’
   ‘The dead man is not circumcised, hence the doubts I mentioned just now. It wouldn’t be the first time Roddeck had been mistaken.’
   ‘I don’t know if the captain was circumcised, Inspector. He was high brass and I was a staff sergeant. You think he ever stood under the shower with the likes of me?’
   ‘Shame, but perhaps you can still be of service.’
   ‘I can’t imagine how.’
   ‘Apart from Lieutenant Roddeck you are the only survivor from that time. The only man who knows Benjamin Engel. Could you identify him?’
   ‘I’m afraid I don’t have time.’
   ‘No need for you to come here. I’ve sent you a few photos of the dead man. They’ll be arriving soon.’
   ‘I see.’
   ‘Take a look at the pictures and let me know.’
   For a long time after the Berlin inspector hung up, Grimberg stood receiver in hand, staring out of the window. He had suspected something was amiss, that Roddeck was up to something. That he wasn’t playing with an open hand. So far only suspected, but now he knew.
   103
   It was raining heavily, and Roddeck had stowed his script under his jacket. He’d have liked to call the whole thing off, but Goebbels himself had heard him promise over supper at the minister’s own private apartment on Reichskanzlerplatz. He had been invited as the emerging star of the new Germany’s literary scene along with two student leaders who were not only readers of his work but had also spoken enthusiastically about their action against the ‘un-German spirit’. He couldn’t say whether it was the praise or the wine that inspired him, only that he had promptly pledged his support.
   ‘You, my dear Roddeck,’ Goebbels said, ‘are a shining example of what German literature can achieve when shorn of the ballast of its distorting Jewish influence. Now, shine!’
   Aglow with wine, he had dazzled them with his promises, later publishing an essay which, thanks to the Student Association news service, was carried in several newspapers:German Literature in the Year Zero. It was his publisher, Dr Hildebrandt, who had done the lion’s share of the work, but it had been a great success, thrusting Roddeck’s name further into the limelight and ensuring that, already,Märzgefallene was being reprinted for the seventh time.
   About tonight’s speech, also written by Dr Hildebrandt, he wasn’t so sure. It wasn’t that he was afraid of public speaking, quite the opposite. His problem was time, and an appointment he couldn’t afford to miss. It was why he had declined to take part in the torchlight procession which would carry the books from the student residence at Monbijou Palace via Karlstrasse towards the Reichstag, from there down Unter den Linden, and on to the university. No wonder it was taking so long.
   He looked at his wristwatch. Gone half past ten, and where were they? People had been waiting here, by the Opera House, for hours. By now a few students had appeared, as well as the police and fire brigade, and the newsreel who made everything as bright as day with their lights, row upon row illuminating the pyre, the lectern draped in flags behind a bouquet of microphones, and the onlookers, the rain above transformed into glittering threads. The rest of the square was a sea of hats and heads, almost lost in darkness.
   Despite the weather it felt almost like a public festival. Street hawkers peddled hot sausages and drinks, cigarettes and chocolate. Some were selling trench mirrors to bystanders, relics from the war used to look over the heads of those in front. Umbrella salesmen would have done a brisk trade too, but of these there was no sign.
   When everyone was thoroughly soaked, the rain stopped between one moment and the next, as if someone had turned a giant tap to‘off’. At last he could hear what he had been waiting for, the distant blare of brass instruments, and chants that echoed through the night.Deutschland erwache, Juda verrecke. Germany awake, Jew die.
   He joined the crowd as it streamed towards Unter den Linden, approaching via the central promenade, escorted by mounted police. The mass of students reached back to the Brandenburger Tor, a swaying sea of torches and flags. The trucks with the forbidden books came rolling across the central promenade, normally reserved for pedestrians. Uniformed students stood on the load platforms.
   Above flags and torches emerged a long pole, onto which a head appeared to have been skewered, a bust of Magnus Hirschfeld, the sex researcher, who advocated that homosexuality go unpunished. Few here would have anything against seeing the head of the Jew faggot impaled for real but, like so many of the cowards whose books were being burned, Hirschfeld hadn’t set foot in Germany for years. His filthy institute had been ransacked the previous week.
   As the procession approached, firemen poured canisters of petrol on the soaking pyre.
   When they reached the square – corps students in full regalia, others in the uniforms of the SA and SS – they marched in formation to the SA brass band. This was what he loved about this German revolution: so well organised, sodisciplined. No other among history’s revolutions could match theirs.
   He made his way over to Hippler and Gutjahr, the two student leaders at Goebbels’ dinner, and was reaching to shake hands when Fritz Hippler raised his arm in a wordless Hitler salute. Herbert Gutjahr promptly followed. Glossing over hisfaux-pas Roddeck returned the greeting. The student leaders took him between them and positioned themselves beside the lectern, where they could watch like generals in battle. Dressed in their SA uniforms they hardly resembled students, although they were no older than twenty. Some of the torchbearers were even younger. Marching past, they threw their torches on the pyre and, with a mightywoof, the petrol erupted in blue flames.
   Sandwiched between his hosts, Roddeck no longer dared look at his watch, but knew it must be close to eleven. Time was running away.
   As the fire and the heat grew, the crowd retreated and soon even the trucks had to reverse away. Students formed human chains to transport the books to the flames. So young and enthusiastic, the dynamism of the new Germany was vibrantly present. This was a youth movement and the thought made him feel young again.
   His novel had appeared at exactly the right time. But for Grimberg’s encouragement he would have taken years to finish, but he had been spurred on by the prospect of unearthing the Alberich gold. The book was meant to serve as bait but, if it continued to sell in such numbers, he would have no need of the spoils. He was one of the heroes of the new Germany.
   If he could just do something about the fear, but since Wosniak’s death he had been scared stiff. The letter only made things worse.
   The flames reflected back from the windows of the Opera House and theKommode, the former royal library which was now the university assembly hall. Shadows danced across the faces in the crowd: an unreal, ghostly effect. He let his gaze wander over them. People were here from all sections of society. All could be future readers of his novel. He hesitated. It couldn’t be, could it? but… A face he hadn’t seen in sixteen years. A captain’s uniform from the war. Was it really the man they had been trying to draw out for weeks? Whose initial letter had so terrified them. Whom they hadn’t heard from in almost a year and the arrival of a second letter.
   He scoured the crowd. There were any number of uniforms. Mostly SA and SS, but some Stahlhelmers too. A few veterans wore their uniforms from the war, but where he thought he had seen the captain a woman now stood. Behind her the crowd would be lost in darkness but for the flames in the trench mirrors.
   Feverish now, he had to be sure he wasn’t imagining things. Gutjahr whispered, ‘When the band has finished, I will approach the lectern and introduce you’, but all at once Roddeck knew for sure. A better look focused on the unmistakable profile, the captain’s hat, Benjamin Engel in the fiery light looking at him through his spectacle lenses. Benjamin Engel pinning all three speakers with his gaze.
   Roddeck’s eyes closed for a fraction of a second, a single blink, and when he opened them his view was blocked by the human chain. He had lost him again, but there was no doubt. Engel was waiting. He must have read about his appearance at the book burning in a paper somewhere. Achim von Roddeck was a public figure, and it was no secret that he would be here. Was this the moment of revenge Engel had been waiting for? Had the letter been a means of allaying Roddeck’s doubts?
   He turned to the two students and said hoarsely,‘Gutjahr, Hippler, I’m afraid I must disappoint you. My throat has not improved as I’d hoped. If anything, it’s gotten worse.’ He pressed his script on Gutjahr. ‘Read my words for me, and pass my regards to the Students’ Association. Best wishes for your action, only…’ He pointed again to his throat. ‘Only… I won’t be delivering any speeches tonight.’
   Gutjahr was about to say something but a look from Hippler told him to keep quiet.
   ‘I’m very sorry, gentlemen. I was too optimistic. I should never have come here against the express advice of my doctor.’ Unable to face another moment in the beam of the spotlights, he plunged into darkness.
   104
   The new hero of German literature stood between two SA striplings, no doubt planning a big entrance. The popinjay couldn’t have wished for better publicity.
   Friedrich Grimberg wondered if the whole thing might be coincidence: the letter arriving a few days after the inspector’s telephone call, and a few days after the photos. Someone must have pushed it through the letterbox. The coincidence being what hethought he had seen the night before, but written off as imagination, Captain Engel on board the suspension monorail as it passed outside his window, his face strangely clean-shaven, almost picture-perfect.
   Opening the envelope, he recognised the signature and knew the sighting had been real. The same handwriting as the previous year’s letter, written in the same style. Only, this letter wasn’t threatening or abusive. On the contrary.
   Grimberg began reading, even though by now he could practically recite its lines by heart.
   I turn to you as the only living comrade whose address it has been possible for me to find. You have nothing to fear from me, I assure you, just as I did not murder our former comrades. Why should I do a thing like that? It is Lieutenant Roddeck who insists on dragging my name through the mire, no one else.
   You, dear Grimberg, were absent at the time of the incident Roddeck so falsely represents in his novel, but believe me: I did not shoot the innocent children, nor did I shoot the soldier Wegener. I do not know who has the children on their conscience, since by the time I arrived they were already dead, but it was Roddeck, the lieutenant himself, who killed Wegener. I saw it with my own eyes.
   He did it out of fear, and it is the same fear that drives him now. Fear of discovery. Is it not possible that he killed our comrades, in order to eliminate the last witnesses capable of exposing his mendacity?
   I was lucky to survive the war, but I too am guilty. I took the gold that Roddeck and his men buried in the forest by Neuville. Since then I have been tormented by feelings of guilt. Now approaching death myself there are matters I would like to set straight; above all I would like to free the name Benjamin Engel from the mire with which Achim von Roddeck has besmirched it.
   I would like, therefore, dear comrade, to propose a meeting. It will not be to your disadvantage.
   So, Engel was alive, but did not realise that he, Grimberg, had tried to kill him. Hadplanned to eliminate the last witnesses.
   Now, having finally enticed Engel into the open, what choice did he have? Of course he had gone to Berlin. And of course he hadn’t told Roddeck, the traitor, who might be responsible for Wosniak’s death.
   After taking a week’s holiday from the quarry he had told Käthe he had business to attend to. As he had a year ago when he and Wosniak met Roddeck to outline the plan which had turned Achim von Roddeck into a celebrated author. If everything worked out, he wouldn’t be returning to Elberfeld. Not to the quarry, not to Käthe, not to the wreckage of his former life. He was in his mid-forties with time to start afresh, and soon he would have money too. With the help of a trench mirror, he focused on the lectern. The paper had billed Roddeck as speaking on the revival of German literature, but there was no sign of him. The space between the two SA men was empty.
   The younger of the two brownshirts approached the microphone.‘German students! Our action is directed against the un-German spirit.’
   His voice was on the verge of cracking, his R’s rolling like his eyes. No skilled orator, he was a youngster trying to pass himself off as a tribune… but, where was Roddeck?
   ‘Against class struggle and materialism, for a people’s community and idealist view of life,’ the Nazi student said, holding a pile of books aloft. ‘I consign the works of Karl Marx and Kautsky to the flames!’
   He stepped from the lectern and threw the books onto the fire. The crowd looked on with no jeering, no applause, nothing. The next student, with more books under his arm, approached the microphone.‘Against decadence and moral decay. For discipline and decency in family and state. I consign the works of Heinrich Mann, Ernst Glaeser and Erich Kästner to the flames.’
   These were the fire incantations that had been billed in the paper, but where was Roddeck? What was happening? Why weren’t they sticking to the script? He felt uneasy. He had to tread carefully.
   The incantations continued, and more books were cast into the flames. With the mention of the name Remarque came the first hints of applause. Remarque was one of Roddeck’s competitors, whose books would never again be sold in Germany. Grimberg didn’t feel envy. He was no longer under obligation to Roddeck but, still, had to tread carefully. Since learning that the corpse Roddeck had identified as Captain Engel was in fact Heinrich Wosniak, he refused to put anything past the man. Roddeck might be a coward, but you underestimated him at your peril. He could be cold-blooded when the occasion demanded.
   105
   Achim von Roddeck was sweating. Pushing his way through the crowd outside the Opera House, he worked his way towards Behrenstrasse and the Dresdner Bank. From the square he heard the crackle of flames and the chatter of students. Time and again he turned around, but there was no sign of the captain. He searched his coat pocket for his old service Luger, which he had carried since they’d stood down his police protection; the same gun he had used to silence the hysterical recruit Wegener, earning him the enduring respect of his men.
   He gripped the gun in his pocket and released the safety catch. What few pedestrians he encountered behind the Opera House were heading in the other direction, towards the fire. His watch told him he was ahead of schedule, and perhaps that would give him an advantage.
   Midnight, Engel had said, in the decommissioned branch of the Linden tunnel, directly beneath the square where the books were being burned. The access ramp had been filled when the square was repaved, and trams could only pass through the eastern branch, on the other side of the Opera House.
   He could scarcely contain himself. What had Engel written in his letter?Time to get even. He didn’t say whether he meant the gold or some other debt, but that didn’t matter. Roddeck intended to get even in his own way, and finally put an end to the fear, but the worst thing in war was not being able to see your enemy. When you didn’t even know if he would attack. When all you knew was that he wasthere. He had felt this way for months, but now his enemy, Engel, was about to reveal himself.
   Two pairs of parallel tracks issued from Französischer Strasse, and swept elegantly past the eastern side of the Opera House towards the access ramp down into the tunnel’s east branch. He had passed through several times on the number 12, but could he justwalk inside? Signs forbade it, and there wasn’t much room between the track and tunnel wall. He descended into darkness.
   There was no sign of any trams, but still he felt uneasy. Reaching the end of the ramp, he took a flashlight from his coat pocket. It was time to put an end to his fear of Engel’s revenge, of the truth. Having gone out on a limb with his lies, he had sold them to a believing world. Grimberg’s idea was, ‘If you’re going fishing, you need to bait the hook. A man like Engel… you have to appeal to his sense of honour.’
   So Roddeck had added a chapter to his war memoirs, detailing an episode which had been shrouded in silence since March 1917, throwing mud at Engel while clearing everyone else, especially himself and Grimberg, who had wanted to kill the loathsome captain from the start, long before they had made their strike.
   But Engel had let their appeal go unchallenged for weeks, even the murders they sought to pin on him. Grimberg had shown his faithful Heinrich what was to be done, and Wosniak’s first task was to simulate his own death so that he could slip into the role of Todesengel. When, at first, things hadn’t gone to plan Roddeck had been forced to take matters into his own hands and really spell it out. Almost at once, the press pounced on the story of the murdering captain, and soon the police had come to believe it, too. Excepting, perhaps, Inspector Rath, whose scepticism had been a nuisance from the start. Still, no one at Alex listened to a man like that these days.
   The journalist, on the other hand, was another matter. His never-ending telephone calls… ‘How certainare you that Benjamin Engel is dead? Is the body you identified really that of your former captain?’ Sadly, Roddeck could not complain about him to the police commissioner, and he didn’t dare call the newspaper. Best to let sleeping dogs lie.
   He could see a glimmer at the end of the tunnel, on the other side of Unter den Linden, where the electric trains emerged by the Singakademie and continued above ground. In the daytime he might have been able to switch off his torch, but now, a quarter of an hour before midnight, the only light came from the gas lamps.
   To his left was a row of steel columns and, beyond, another tram line. He must have missed the turnout that led into the decommissioned, western branch of the tunnel, where Engel had suggested they meet. He shone his torch back in the direction he had come. The columns extended to a solid wall where the tracks diverged. To the left, arrow-straight, the eastern tunnel, the route he had taken; to the right and describing a westward curve, the western tunnel, leading to the Opera Square, directly beneath the fire.
   Climbing over a low wall between two steel columns, he began tracing the redundant line back into the darkness, his flashlight beam dancing above rusty metal, puddles, and a scurrying rat. Noises from outside were strangely unreal down here, the echo merging them into one. Strains of the brass band accompanied by intermittent jeering and the sounds of traffic, his own footsteps and drops of water splashing out of sight had a dreamlike quality.
   He listened. Was there something else?
   Switching off his flashlight he was enveloped by impenetrable darkness, but… was that the quiet rhythm of footsteps? Heels on concrete, reinforced by the echo, a slow but continuous staccato growing ever louder? It wasn’t coming from the street. Someone was descending the northern ramp.
   He felt panic rising, but remembered his Luger and felt more secure.
   What did you expect? Of course he’s coming down. Be glad he wasn’t waiting for you in the dark.
   When his eyes grew accustomed to the darkness, he made out a glimmer of light filtering into the tunnel from the turnout, giving the puddles and concrete floor a yellow shimmer.
   The footsteps drew nearer until a shadow made the reflections on the puddles dance. Standing stock-still, pressed against the tunnel wall, he scarcely dared breathe. Taking the torch in his left hand he fetched the pistol from his coat pocket as the figure slowed. He heard a clicking sound, and a lighter flared up, illuminating the face of a man gazing fixedly on the ground as he drew closer.‘You?’ he said, and started at the sound of his own voice echoing from the walls of the tunnel.
   106
   Berthold Weinert didn’t want to cover yet another torchlight procession, or listen to still more braying cries ofGermany awake! More flags and dimwit speeches. To cap it all, they were burning books, among them some of his favourite authors. He didn’t want to be here, but Hefner had sent him.
   Every few days the Nazis found some new pretext for mass marches and torchlight processions. Hitler’s birthday, the first of May,book-burning and, whatever it was,Der Tag and its roving reporter Weinert would be somewhere in the midst.
   Against the un-German spirit. What did it mean? The books were written in German, not some strange, other language. He couldn’t help thinking of his own three-quarters-finished novel. Would any publisher take it on?‘Asphalt-literature’ they would say,no one buys that sort of thing anymore.
   His story detailed the exploits of an unsuccessful but optimistic screenplay writer who seeks his fortune in Berlin. Turning it into a tale of Nazi awakening was impossible, but he’d hardly spent any time on it now that his temporary role might become permanent. Perhaps he should just stick it back in its drawer.
   The truth was, Weinert was afraid to jeopardise his prospects with a‘politically dubious’ novel. Better to bide his time and wait for things to change. Finish it then. Nothing stayed the same forever. Besides, the longer a manuscript lay untouched the more it matured. At least he had ceased to rue his slow progress. Indeed, he was happy that his novel – working title,Fade-out – hadn’t been published. In today’s climate, his literary debut – the product of many lonely, torturous night-time hours – would be kindling for the fire.
   He could hardly bear to look as the blaze devoured millions of hours of arduous, creative labour, and still more books careered towards the flames, their pages flapping like lost, dying birds. The students delved into the mounds of books at their feet, emerging with their hands full. Thousands of books were being destroyed and, the worst thing, by students who ought to appreciate them.
   Moments before, Weinert thought he had seen Erich Kästner in the crowd, whose books were destined for the pyre. He must surely be mistaken. Kästner, a fully paid-up member of the ‘asphalt’ literati, must have got out by now. To Prague, like Weinert’s colleague Kleibert, or some other city where you could still say and write what you wanted.
   Gereon had called him yesterday to say that Achim von Roddeck would be speaking, reminding him of the story that stood to make or completely destroy his fledgling career. But Roddeckhadn’t spoken. He had simply vanished, as if sensing that Weinert stood waiting to interrogate him once more.
   The way the author had responded to his questions had confirmed that Gereon must be onto something. Achim von Roddeck knew it wasn’t Benjamin Engel who had been fished out of the Spree, sowhy had he identified the corpse?
   Another, more decisive question was whether Gereon’s story would make it to print. By now it was largely written, even if it was based almost exclusively on supposition, but silence, too, could be eloquent. The silence, say, of the forensic pathologist, who had been as open to Weinert’s inquiries as a sealed coffin. The story might be largely written, but Hefner would never print it unless Weinert found an appropriate scapegoat. Wilhelm Böhm was out of favour, but he had relinquished the case before Roddeck came on the scene, and Weinert wasn’t about to do the dirty on Reinhold Gräf, not now he was part of the State Police. Chances were the story would go unpublished unless Roddeck could be duped into some ill-considered remark.
   He was considering how long he should wait when the crowd broke out in thunderous applause. At first he thought Roddeck was taking to the podium after all, but then he spotted the sedan, and the Reich Minister of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda waving to the crowd like a crown prince.
   Achim von Roddeck wouldn’t be speaking now. The only man allowed to address a crowd after Goebbels was Hitler himself. The minister, dressed in a raincoat and surrounded by adoring, brown-uniformed students, was in high spirits. He had a doctorate in German Studies, but delighted in burning books? Like so many things about the Nazis, Weinert struggled to understand, but he had to admit they knew how to exploit their power.
   ‘Fellow students!’ Goebbels began, emphasising that he, too, was an academic. ‘German men and women! The age of extreme Jewish intellectualism is at an end!’
   107
   Wearing a lost expression while waving his gun around, Achim von Roddeck looked overwhelmed. During the war, this had all too frequently been the case. Without Friedrich Grimberg to cajole or beat decisions out of him, his ineptitude would have been exposed in the first year. For the son of a military family it would have been a disgrace, but Grimberg had shielded him through four and a half miserable years of war. Roddeck switched on his flashlight and stammered,‘Friedrich, what are you doing here?’
   Couldn’t he work it out for himself? At least now Grimberg knew that Roddeck hadn’t been trying to swindle him. If anyone had, it was Engel, who had brought them to this place. ‘Are you going to shoot me?’ he asked.
   Roddeck smiled nervously and lowered his weapon.‘Sorry, I thought… you never know who might be down here.’
   ‘On the contrary. You know very well.’ Grimberg looked at his watch. ‘In five minutes, Benjamin Engel will be here. If he intends to meet us at all.’
   ‘He’ll be here,’ Roddeck said. ‘I saw him at the book-burning. He’s in the crowd somewhere.’
   ‘Perhaps he wanted us to gun each other down.’
   ‘My God, Friedrich, I’m not going to shoot you! We’re comrades.’
   ‘That didn’t stop you from killing Wegener.’
   ‘Wegener, a comrade? He’d have betrayed us in a flash.’
   ‘And Heinrich? Why did he have to die?’
   ‘Pardon me?’
   ‘Don’t play the innocent! You saw his corpse. It was clever of you to pass him off as Engel, but you should have told me. Now I can’t shake the feeling you mean to go behind my back, just like you went behind poor Heinrich’s back and stabbed him with his own dagger.’
   ‘Why would I do that?’
   ‘Because you want it all for yourself. You’ve tasted blood. Of the original fifteen, only two remain. You and me.’
   ‘I didn’t kill Wosniak! That was Engel.’
   ‘Why should I believe you, and why didn’t you tell me straight away?’
   ‘I’m sorry, Friedrich, but right now… the book’s just come out, and you wouldn’t believe how draining it’s all been.’
   ‘You’re sodrained you have to pretend not to be there when an old comrade calls.’
   Roddeck smiled his uncertain, false smile.‘We’re both here, so why don’t we talk now?’
   ‘First we need to work out what to do with Engel. When he appears in…’ He looked at his watch. ‘…three minutes’ time. Any thoughts?’
   Roddeck shrugged.‘I thought I’d do the same with him as… with you.’
   Grimberg saw the flash and felt himself swept backwards off his feet, heard the deafening bang, amplified a hundred times and accompanied by an echo louder than any of the explosions he had triggered and with a stronger shock wave. It was stronger even than the one from the trench all those years ago, which had likewise knocked him off his feet. Back then he had landed on soft, muddy ground, but now he found himself lying on his back on hard concrete, in a cold puddle, legs straddling the tram rails. He felt no pain, registering only how badly he was struggling for air. Try as he might, he couldn’t get enough oxygen in his lungs.
   For a moment he thought there had been a stray explosion, but then saw Achim von Roddeck above him, a smoking Luger in his hand. He wanted to say something but all that came from his lungs was a torrent of blood.
   Roddeck wasn’t smiling anymore. ‘Something on your mind, Grimberg? Save your breath.’
   Friedrich Grimberg wanted to speak but couldn’t. Achim von Roddeck raised his pistol and he gazed into the dark barrel. There was another flash, then everything went black.
   108
   Roddeck had hated the man from his first posting to the front, almost twenty years ago, when Staff Sergeant Friedrich Grimberg saw him piss his pants in a shell crater. Another barrage began and he panicked. At first he hadn’t noticed anything. Only when the shooting ended did he feel the wetness between his legs, along with a bottomless shame.
   Grimberg and he crawled across the muddy ground and returned to camp looking like a pair of pigs. They had no choice but to clean their uniforms, and no one else noticed, but from that day Grimberg, two ranks his junior, had him over a barrel, later even managing to wangle his best friend Heinrich Wosniak a job as Roddeck’s orderly. Roddeck had caught himself marvelling at Grimberg’s vigour, growing ever more dependent on the man, and hating himself for it at the same time, and there was no respite after March 1917, thanks to the secret that bound them and many others.
   Most were killed before the conflict ended, Grimberg’s idea to send them on a series of suicide missions. Only Meifert and Wibeau had survived, and Wosniak, of course, but he was untouchable and they planned to share the gold with him. The others would be eliminated as soon as it was recovered.
   The gold! When in 1924 they returned from France empty-handed, Roddeck had truly believed it was cursed. Grimberg had laughed, but he wasn’t laughing now. He would never again be dependent on Grimberg or his sinister friend, Wosniak. If his ‘faithful Heinrich’ hadn’t killed those two French children in cold blood, Wegener wouldn’t have lost his nerve and Roddeck wouldn’t have shot him. Or Grimberg. They would never humiliate him again.
   Had it really been Engel’s intention that they kill each other? Well, with Grimberg down the next on the list would be Benjamin Engel himself. Perhaps Grimberg was right, and Engel wouldn’t show. Even so he remained watchful, listening for sounds from the tunnel entrance. The captain wouldn’t expect trouble, assuming the gold held the importance it always had, but he would be mistaken. Grimberg had wanted the gold, yes, as Roddeck had until a few weeks ago, but with his novel’s growing popularity it had become less important. A place in the new Germany beckoned, and money couldn’t buy it. The new Reich waswaiting for his voice, his work, and no way was he going to risk that for something as base as French gold.
   ‘Hands in the air!’
   A voice he hadn’t heard in sixteen years came from behind him. He turned, and from the darkness of the decommissioned tunnel a man carrying a pistol stepped into the light. Not a world-war pistol, but a modern Walther PP. He had been here the whole time, and wore a captain’s uniform which couldn’t be the one he’d been buried in. His face was divided in two. One half was doll-like somehow, too perfect, while the other was covered in scars. Both, unmistakably, had the features of Benjamin Engel.
   He went weak at the knees, felt panic rising, just like in the crater where his dreams of a noble war, and a return home as an admired and decorated military hero, had been shattered. Was he going to die here, in this hole?
   ‘Hands in the air!’ Engel barked.
   Slowly Achim von Roddeck raised his hands, Luger in the right, flashlight in the left.
   109
   Rath’s thinking had allowed for a corpse, so he felt no remorse. Grimberg killing Roddeck would have thrown a spanner in the works, but it had happened the other way around. Achim von Roddeck had murdered his old comrade just as ruthlessly as he had gunned down Wegener. It was fear that drove him, plain and simple, the same fear now showing in his eyes.
   Achim von Roddeck was petrified, facing a Walther PP and an army captain apparently risen from the dead.‘It’s not what you think, Sir. I had nothing to do with the attempt on your life.’ He sounded as if he were about to cry. ‘It was Grimberg’s idea, all of it. He hated you from the start.’
   Rath would have liked to see Roddeck squirm for longer but that would be asking too much of his accomplice. Before he could break cover, darkness descended. Roddeck must have switched off his flashlight. There was a muzzle flash and a shot, the sound of running feet. He didn’t know which man had fired, but it didn’t matter. He had to move and set off at pace.
   ‘Don’t shoot, Engel,’ he shouted, almost tripping over Grimberg’s body. He had to keep further to the left, away from the wall. ‘Stay where you are, Roddeck. CID! There’s no escape.’
   There was another flash. Roddeck fired two rounds, missing both times. He couldn’t be far away. A silhouette appeared in the dim light at the end of the tunnel. Now or never!
   Accelerating, Rath made a full-length dive, grabbing Roddeck’s ankles and taking him to ground. Roddeck’s head crashed against a tram rail where he lay dazed. Rath snatched away his pistol, pulled his hands behind his back and cuffed him. The flashlight must have slipped out of Roddeck’s hand as he fell. Rath found it in a puddle and switched it on.
   Roddeck looked up at him.‘You?’ he said.
   Rath pulled him up and pushed him back inside the decommissioned tunnel.‘Where’s Engel? I hope for your sake he isn’t injured.’
   They walked in silence back to Grimberg’s corpse. There was no sign of the captain. ‘I’d have settled for a confession, but now you’ve shown what you’re capable of, things should be a lot easier.’
   ‘I can’t imagine this operation was approved by the commissioner.’ Roddeck’s voice was steady again, almost as arrogant as before.
   ‘Of course not. You think the commissioner’s capable of blackmail?’
   ‘What are you up to, Rath? Are you threatening me?’
   ‘I want to make you an offer. That’s what blackmail is, after all, an exchange.’
   ‘What do you have?’
   ‘Your freedom. I’ll let you go, and no one will ever know who shot Friedrich Grimberg. As far as the other murders are concerned…’
   ‘You can’t prove a thing. I’ve nothing to do with them.’
   ‘Of course you have. Wosniak might have done the dirty work, but you pulled the strings. Still, let’s not quibble over details. You killed Grimberg, and that I can prove.’
   ‘You lured me into a trap with the help of Captain Engel, a man subject to a nationwide murder hunt, knowing it might end in death. Perhaps I should be the one offeringyou an exchange, Inspector. Aren’t you concerned for your career?’
   ‘Not as much as you ought to be concerned for your life and reputation. Both of which will go on the scaffold.’
   Roddeck fell silent, a wretched figure with bloody forehead, tangled hair and water-stained raincoat.
   ‘Engel came to me in confidence and told me the whole sorry tale,’ Rath lied.
   ‘Who’s going to believe a Jew? Or you, for that matter.’
   ‘But they’ll believeyou.’
   He seized Roddeck by the arm and led him further along the tunnel until the curve became a straight. They were now standing beneath Unter den Linden, looking at a box on the wall. On the front was a large rotary control and a jet-black cassette in the form of a sideways figure-of-eight. A cable extended up the tunnel wall and along the ceiling towards the exit, almost reaching back to where Friedrich Grimberg’s corpse lay. There, fixed to an old, out-of-service tunnel lamp, was a microphone.
   The device whirred quietly. Rath switched it off.
   ‘A friend of mine is a film producer,’ he said. ‘It’s a Klangfilm camera, model X, a reportage camera for portable use.’
   ‘You’ve lost me.’
   ‘Let’s say you needn’t worry about not being filmed tonight by the newsreel. Everything you’ve said and done in the last ten minutes is preserved for posterity.’
   ‘Crafty little rat, aren’t you?’
   ‘The same as you.’
   ‘You’ll never get it past court.’
   ‘I’m not planning to. There’ll be plenty of others interested in the sound recording.’
   ‘Will there now?’
   ‘Your publisher, Reich Minister Goebbels, the police commissioner, to name a few, and various newspapers at home and abroad.’ Rath pointed at the horizontal figure-of-eight. ‘That cassette contains a talkie without the pictures, and you know the best thing about it? Recordings like this can be copied a hundred times over.’
   There was no longer any trace of fear in Roddeck’s face, only blind, helpless rage. ‘What do you want from me?’
   ‘This.’
   Rath took a piece of paper from his pocket and held it under Roddeck’s nose as he shone the flashlight.
   ‘If you sign this, I’ll let you walk out of here on your own.’ Rath pointed in the direction of the tunnel exit and the brass band music. The midnight burning ceremony appeared to be over. ‘No one will ever know what happened tonight in the Linden tunnel.’
   Roddeck skimmed the text and blanched.‘That’s…’ He faltered. ‘You want me to cede all rights to my novel?’
   ‘And all royalties. Unless you want this here to fall into the wrong hands…’
   ‘It will ruin me!’
   ‘There’s always the alternative…’
   ‘What guarantee do I have the recording won’t be passed on?’
   ‘Guarantees are for washing machines and vacuum cleaners.’
   ‘Who the hell is Hannelore Schneider?’ Roddeck asked.
   ‘Someone deserving.’ Rath loosened Roddeck’s cuffs and handed him his fountain pen.
   No doubt contracts drawn up by Gustav Kohn had been sealed in some strange places, Rath thought, especially if they had been written for Johann Marlow, perhaps even overlooking the odd corpse, but a decommissioned tramcar tunnel must be a first. He checked Roddeck’s signature. Everything was in order.
   ‘Now scram,’ he said, waving the ink dry. ‘I don’t want to see your face again, or read your name in the papers.’
   ‘Where am I supposed to go?’
   ‘To hell as far as I’m concerned.’
   ‘And my pistol?’
   ‘It stays with me, along with your flashlight.’
   Achim von Roddeck looked as if he were about to cry. Slowly at first, then with growing haste, he made for the tunnel exit. Rath gazed after him without pity.
   Behind him he heard a groan.‘Can I take this off now? It hurts.’
   The man in the captain’s uniform stepped out of the darkness of the tunnel and removed the half-face as though it were a carnival mask. Walther Engel’s face was sweaty, and half covered in painted red welts. The right sleeve of his uniform glistened damply.
   ‘My God, did Roddeck hit you?’ said Rath.
   ‘Caught me on the arm. Just a graze.’
   ‘I never should have asked you to do this.’
   ‘It’s what I wanted, Inspector, and I knew the risks. Who else was going to do it? My mother would never have given the mask to you.’ He looked down at Grimberg’s body. ‘So, that’s the man who tried to kill my father.’
   ‘He succeeded too,’ said Rath. ‘Even if it took him ten years.’
   110
   He ought to have been happy, but all he felt was a kind of relief. Everything had gone off without a hitch apart from Kirie’s barking, but that was to be expected. Fritze had looked after her and the ceremony, by that stage mainly forms and signatures, had proceeded without interruption.
   Charly wore the home-made, knee-length, white dress she would wear again on Saturday. No veil but to Rath, even with just the white hat, she made the perfect bride. Above all, because shebehaved like the perfect bride who said‘yes’ and revealed her dimpled smile. No sooner had their lips met than Kirie started barking. The old girl couldn’t bear to watch, which was why she had her basket in the corridor and in case of doubt was shown the door.
   After Hannelore relieved the guests of their coats, Rath showed the small party to the living room and closed the door before Kirie could slink inside. He took a deep breath. They had come this far.
   After lunch in the Charlottenburger Ratskeller, underneath the town hall, the company had departed in two taxicabs for Carmerstrasse. Engelbert Rath nodded in approval of the area his son had chosen to make his home. Entering the stairwell, however, he became more sceptical, no fan of modern architecture, which meant everything built after the war.
   Rath almost forgot to carry Charly over the threshold, but a look from her, and a hefty nudge from Paul, reminded him of his duties as groom. Fritze was present to capture the moment for the family album in which he, too, found his place.
   Charly had insisted on taking photos of his first day at school, albeit minus the satchel.‘No way you’re making a sap out of me!’ As it happened, his first two schooldays were holidays, German Labour Day on 1st May followed by a belated celebration of Hitler’s birthday. The Nazis knew how to make themselves popular.
   ‘As far as I’m concerned, this can carry on,’ Fritze had said, but it couldn’t. On 3rd May classes started in earnest. Yes, he was now an unofficial member of the family, and stood to be formally recognised as the foster child of the newlyweds at the youth welfare office three weeks hence.
   For a moment, Rath had been concerned that Charly’s decisive ‘yes’ was not only a product of her love, but their need to appear as a respectable married couple while there. He pushed the thought aside. Now they were man and wife they’d manage with the boy somehow, especially as she would be at home during the day.
   Hannelore appeared with a tray of champagne glasses and curtseyed politely. With her white apron and bonnet, she looked as if she’d never done anything else. Without saying much, she made a decent job of it, her manner courteous and reliable.
   ‘Thank you, Hannelore,’ Rath said, taking a glass for himself. Drawing Charly towards him, he held his champagne aloft and the murmuring died. He could spare himself a speech, having already given one at lunch.
   ‘Dear parents and friends, welcome to the Rath family’s new branch office in Berlin!’ He winked at his father, and kissed Charly, this time uninterrupted by Kirie, and was met with a round of applause.
   Together in Carmerstrasse they had the smallest possible number of guests: two witnesses, Paul Wittkamp and Greta Overbeck, and, inevitably, the parents, Erika and Engelbert Rath, as well as Luise Ritter, Charly’s mother. Rath hadn’t met her until after the engagement, and had seen her on only two or three occasions since. He sensed Charly was a little ashamed of her mother, but he was no different where his parents were concerned.
   Following the unexpected death of her husband, Luise Ritter had waited until Charly finished school before leaving Moabit behind, returning to her sister and parents in Schwiebus, a small town in the Brandenburg Province, beyond the banks of the Oder. She had never felt at ease in the capital, and had only moved there for the sake of her husband. A working-class woman from the provinces who dwelt too much in the past, she lamented the loss of Prussia’s King and Imperial Germany’s Kaiser.
   Rath’s parents were her opposites in just about every way. Engelbert and Erika Rath might, in nostalgic moments, secretly mourn the good old days, but they were fully paid-up members of the bourgeoisie, correspondingly educated and often at receptions, concerts or the theatre. They were used to beingheard, by domestic servants, police officers and, indeed, their own children.
   Luise Ritter’s only point in common with Erika Rath, who was as comfortable in the home as she was in polite society, was that she had married a Prussian official, albeit an administrator with Moabit district council rather than a police director on friendly terms with the mayor of Cologne.
   Charly seemed to worship her dead father like a saint, her mother on the other hand… Well, Rath thought, you can’t choose your parents, just as you couldn’t choose your children.
   Except, of course, Charly had chosen hers.
   He had to hand it to her though, she could have chosen a lot worse. The boy certainly livened up the place, sometimes made it a littletoo lively. Those quiet moments Rath so valued, drinking cognac and listening to music, had been all but consigned to the past. Stealing a glance towards the other side of the room, he spied a copy of thePrager Tageblatt on his favourite chair. He went over and discreetly returned it to the newspaper rack.
   TheTageblatt, increasingly hard to get hold of in Germany, had devoted four columns to the story of the dead man from the Spree, falsely identified thanks to the carelessness of the Berlin Police. WhoeverReinhold Böhm might be, he clearly had intimate knowledge of the situation in the capital. Perhaps he was one of the exiles who had recently decamped to Prague, and was now throwing as much mud as possible at the new Germany. Certainly, that had been Magnus von Levetzow’s interpretation, the commissioner having summoned Rath to his office first thing Monday morning.
   Beside the accusations levelled at his person and the police authorities at large, the most troubling aspect for Levetzow was that serious allegations had been made against the new Germany’s great literary hope. Having successfully played the innocent, Rath would send the article, which had appeared at the weekend, to Walther Engel first thing tomorrow. His father’s honour had been vindicated, at least for those Germans living abroad, for whom theTageblatt was the most important newspaper.
   Germans at home, on the other hand, remained in the dark. Government policy was to disregard or refute allTageblatt articles and, on this occasion, they had opted for disregard, which meant that‘official’ reports had to provide a different explanation for Achim von Roddeck’s disappearance. The last person to see him was Herbert Gutjahr, leader of the Berlin and Brandenburg branch of the German Students’ Association, and organiser of the book-burning on Opera Square. According to Gutjahr, shortly before making his planned speech Roddeck had thrust his script into his hands and made his excuses on health grounds.
   Roddeck did not return to his hotel. It was as if he had fallen off the face of the Earth, and the papers began to speculate wildly on his whereabouts, even suggesting that the nationalist cause had given rise to its own B. Traven, the mysterious author who wrote from a secret location abroad.
   Poor Roddeck, Rath thought. First he’s hailed as the national revolution’s answer to Remarque, now he’s up against B. Traven andThe Treasure of the Sierra Madre. Not that the rumours did any harm to sales ofMärzgefallene, quite the opposite.
   Gregor Hildebrandt was sure to be pleased, although he had been open mouthed when Liang presented him with the transfer authority drawn up by Gustav Kohn and signed by Roddeck. He didn’t think to protest though, or go to the police. Few did after looking into Liang’s dark eyes.Nibelungen paid by cash initially; all future payments would be by cheque. According to Marlow, on Liang’s departure Hildebrandt had asked the same question as Achim von Roddeck: ‘Who is Hannelore Schneider?’
   Hannelore Schneider was here, attending to Rath and Charly’s wedding guests.
   No one had linked the corpse in the Linden tunnel with Roddeck’s disappearance, and theVossische provided no more than a summary report, a single column, thirty lines or so.‘Dead man in the Linden Tunnel!’ The rest was a mystery, police groping in the dark. Soon the file would be consigned to the other ‘wet fish’, the Castle’s store of unsolved cases.
   Someone cleared his throat and Rath turned to see his father beside him, champagne in hand, and in high spirits.‘Not bad, Gereon. Neat flat, prime location, and an enchanting bride.’
   ‘Thanks, Papa.’ Rath gestured outside the window. ‘Dr Weiss lived over there until recently.’
   Engelbert Rath nodded pensively.‘It’s a disgrace. Our best people are being hounded from office.’
   No doubt he was partly referring to himself. Though still in post with the rank of police director, Rath senior was having a hard time in Cologne. As a known associate of Adenauer, he found himself sidelined and no longer involved in the decision-making process at Krebsgasse. His contacts in the‘Cologne cabal’, mostly fellow Centre Party members, were as good as useless, since practically all Centrists had been ousted from positions of influence. Konrad Adenauer was the tip of the iceberg. For two or three weeks now, the former mayor had taken sanctuary in a monastery, and Engelbert Rath refused to say which. Suspicion, even of one’s own family, was a way of life in the new Germany.
   Rath had never seen his father so rattled. Mother hadn’t told him the whole story, and probably didn’t know everything herself, but the new age weighed heavy on the police director’s shoulders.
   His parents would remain in Berlin until the weekend. For them the Catholic ceremony was the one that counted, and for their sake he played along. Today everything was low-key, with Rath dressed in a dark formal suit, which made him look a little like a politician. The cutaway and top hat were for Saturday, for Schöneberg and Pastor Warszawski. The guest list would be longer on Saturday too, though there would be no place for Reinhold Gräf. Intending to invite him, Rath had finally struck his name from the list and, on Charly’s wishes, replaced him with Wilhelm Böhm. Gennat’s attendance was something they had been able to agree on, likewise the presence of a few colleagues and friends and, of course, Rath’s sister and her family. He’d be glad when the whole thing was over.
   Presents had been arriving for a few days. Bernhard Weiss had sent a card inside theTageblatt, while Rath’s colleagues from A had sent best wishes by post. Even Cologne was represented in the pile. A ladies’ and a gentleman’s wristwatch, with best regards from master watchmaker Eduard Schürmann. Rath didn’t like to think where they might have come from, nor what wedding gift they could expectfrom Johann Marlow.
   Charly bade them to table, where, as convention dictated, Hannelore had laid places for coffee and cake. She poured coffee and there followed a relaxed conversation about cake recipes, the lousy weather and the registrar’s lovely speech.
   Rath smiled at Charly. They had done everything right. Their only mistake, as it would transpire three-quarters of an hour later, was to place Charly’s mother next to the Telefunken radiogramophone.
   ‘That’s a… you have a radio?’ Luise Ritter cried, opening the lid. ‘Do you mind?’ she asked, and switched it on. There was a crackling, then a voice announced itself. Berliner Funkstunde. Adolf Hitler’s voice rasped through the room, transmitting from the Reichstag.
   ‘Speaking now, as a German National Socialist, I would like to proclaim on behalf of the National Government and the entire national uprising that, above all, we in this young Germany are filled with a deep understanding for those who share our feelings and convictions in other nations across theglobe.’
   All at table looked at each other in embarrassment, but no one dared speak. Luise Ritter didn’t notice. Charly’s mother was concentrating as hard on the device as her daughter had weeks before, when the election results were read out.
   ‘The generation of this young Germany, which until now has known only the want, misery and wretchedness of its own people, has suffered too greatly from this madness to consider subjecting others to the same. Devoted as we are in boundless love and faith to our own national traditions, so we respect the rights of other nations, and desire, from the bottom of our hearts, to live with them in peace and harmony. Thus, we do not recognise the concept of Germanisation. The mentality of the previous century, where it was believed that Germans could be made out of Poles and Frenchmen is alien to us, and something that, were it imposed on our citizens, we ourselves would ardently oppose.’
   ‘Hannelore!’ Rath ended the painful silence. ‘Bring another bottle of champagne from the kitchen. Fritze can help. Let’s make a toast.’
   The girl curtseyed and disappeared.
   He tried to get the conversation going again, asking his father for the latest on Adenauer. Meanwhile, together with Paul, Erika dredged up old stories from Gereon’s childhood for the benefit of Greta. Charly shot her mother a series of angry glances but, immersed as she was in Hitler’s speech, they had no effect.
   Hannelore returned with the champagne, Rath proposed another toast and they all raised their glasses except for Luise Ritter.‘Shh,’ she said. ‘Stop making so much noise!’ while turning up the volume so that Adolf Hitler’s voice filled the room.
   ‘I feel obliged to state that the reason for France or Poland’s current armament cannot possibly be fear of a German invasion. Such a fear would be justified only by the existence of modern offensive weapons, and it is precisely such weapons that Germany does not possess, neither heavy artillery, nor tanks, nor bombers nor poisonous gases. The only nation that could justifiably fear invasion is Germany itself, which is forbidden not only from keeping offensive weapons, but finds its right to avail of defensive weapons restricted, and is, moreover, barred from erecting border fortifications. Germany is ready to renounce offensive weapons at any time, provided the rest of the world does the same. Germany is ready to join any solemn non-aggression pact, for Germany is not interested in attack, only in ensuring its own safety.’
   For a while they sat with glasses raised, until at last Charly cried simply:‘Mother!’
   ‘The Führer! I knew it…’ Luise Ritter looked triumphantly around with a transfigured smile. ‘He wantspeace!’
   Rath now understood why Charly had reacted badly to his comments about Hitler and women.‘Mother, we don’t want to hear it. This is a wedding, your daughter’s wedding!’
   ‘But child, the Führer is speaking!’ Luise Ritter seemed to be in a trance.
   ‘He isn’tmy Führer. It’s bad enough he has to be my Reich Chancellor,’ Charly said. She went to the radio and turned it off. Rath hadn’t seen her this angry in a long time.
   ‘Quite right,’ Engelbert Rath said. ‘We may have no choice but to accept the man as Chancellor, but going along with this Nazi nonsense and calling him Führer… Never!’ He raised his glass and drank.
   Rath had never heard his father speak so bluntly about politics. All the better, then, that he was on Charly’s side.
   ‘All I wanted was to listen to the radio,’ Luise Ritter grumbled.
   ‘All right, mother. I think that’s enough champagne.’
   Erika Rath tried to get conversation around the table going again.‘It’s not that we don’t own a radio, but we don’t listen to that sort of thing. There’s far too much politics these days.’
   ‘There can’t be enough politics as far as I’m concerned,’ Charly’s mother responded. ‘Particularly if it gets Germany back on its feet.’
   ‘That’s just it, though, Frau Ritter,’ Engelbert Rath said. ‘Will it? Those running politics today are not politicians, and they have hounded our most capable men out of office!’
   ‘Meaning who, exactly? Your Papist party colleagues? What have you Catholics ever done for us?’ Luise Ritter stood up. Suddenly she became the militant Protestant Rath had experienced when, on a previous occasion, discussion had turned to his Church. ‘Making pacts with the Reds, ushering the Social Democrats into power. Your Erzberger was the worst of all the November criminals!’
   ‘Erzberger!’ Now Engelbert Rath flew off the handle. ‘The man died for his beliefs! Do you seriously believe he gave his signature to the armisticewillingly. With those conditions attached. We had no choice!’
   ‘Ha!’ Luise Ritter said. ‘Had I known my daughter was marrying into a family like this! Never, my child, would I have allowed…’
   ‘Mother! That’s enough! This ismy wedding, and I refuse to have it spoiled by you!’
   Charly was seething. Any more of this and she’d be throwing her mother out of the window. Which perhaps wasn’t the worst idea.
   Before things could get that far, however, Paul rose to his feet, positioned himself behind Charly and grinned a grin that screamed‘up to no good’.
   ‘You know what’s customary in the Rhineland?’ he said.
   ‘What?’ Luise Ritter asked.
   ‘Kidnapping the bride.’
   With that he grabbed Charly, threw her over his shoulder and was out the door.
   The quarrelling ceased and everyone looked towards Rath as if expecting an explanation. He hunched his shoulders.‘Excuse me,’ he said, ‘but in the Rhineland it’s also customary for the groom torecover his bride.’
   He set down his glass and rose to his feet. Kirie’s tail wagged a greeting as he stepped into the corridor, but he left her where she was, threw on his coat, and went on his way.
   ‘Wait,’ came the cry from the stairwell.
   He came to a halt and turned around. Greta had followed him. Greta, the cold, unknowable blonde who had always treated him like dirt. What did she want? Charly’s friend was smiling at him. Had he ever seen her smile before? By God, but it suited her.
   ‘Mind if I join?’ she asked. ‘Bride-hunting’s one of my specialties.’
   111
   Grown-ups were stupid. Each in their own way, but stupid all the same. It didn’t matter if they were beggars in the Crow’s Nest, nurses in Dalldorf, or members of polite society squabbling like tinkers because some man on the radio said something stupid about politics. Grown-ups were always fighting over politics.
   She had set down the bottle and cooler and taken refuge inside the kitchen. The only other person there was Lina, the fat maid, who was busy brewing another pot of coffee. Leave the rest to their squabbling.
   ‘What’s going on in there?’ Lina asked.
   Hannah shrugged eloquently. She heard doors slamming. Once. Pause. Twice. Suddenly it was quiet.
   After a second pause, the kitchen door opened and Fritze entered looking bashful.‘Hannah… Hannelore, are you coming? I think our guests are leaving.’
   She followed him into the hall. Moments ago the guests had been at each other’s throats, now it was all poisonous glances. Only the three parents were left. No sign of Charly, Gereon or their friends. She shot Fritze a questioning look.
   ‘My coat please, Fräulein,’ said the woman who had started all the trouble.
   Hannah took the heavy coat from the stand and held it while the woman slipped it on.‘Thank you,’ she said, leaving the apartment without another word.
   ‘I think we’ll be heading back to our hotel now too?’ said the man with the white moustache. ‘Any idea where the young people might have gone, lad?’
   Fritze grabbed the gentleman’s overcoat. ‘No idea. Kidnapping the bride? First I’ve heard of it.’
   ‘Better Herr Wittkamp gets it out of his system before Saturday,’ the woman said. She turned to Hannah. ‘Please let my son know we’ll be staying at the Savoy. He can give us a ring once he’s found his bride-to-… his wife.’
   Hannah curtseyed and, with that, the last of the grown-ups had gone. She looked at Fritze. He was grinning.
   ‘Good thing it’s over,’ he said, pulling at the collar of his elegant suit. ‘I’ll be glad to get out of these clothes. How about you? Fancy slipping into something more comfortable?’
   The black dress itched under her arms and, with the frilly apron and white bonnet perched on top of her dyed-blonde hair, she felt as if she were in fancy dress. Which, in a way, she was.
   Kirie wagged her tail expectantly.‘She needs to be walked,’ said Fritze.
   ‘Now?’
   ‘A few weeks ago we were out in weather like this all the time!’
   ‘All right then.’
   Five minutes later she was in the clothes they had given her in Freienwalde, the red-white spotted dress, red shoes, woollen stockings, warm coat and beret, while Fritze sat at the table, also in his coat, eating a piece of cake. Kirie waited on her lead, ready for action.‘Let’s go,’ she said.
   ‘Right you are, Hannelore, and don’t forget your umbrella.’
   She grimaced in response. Hannelore sounded so staid, but the men in Freienwalde had said it was better to choose a name similar to the old one. If need be you could mask a slip of the tongue. In her case: an identical first syllable and the same initials.
   H.S. Hannah Singer. Hannelore Schneider. It might sound similar, but it was also completely different.
   It wasn’t such a bad idea to bring the umbrella. It was bucketing down as they emerged onto Carmerstrasse. May at its worst. On Steinplatz they waited until Kirie had performed her business. ‘I think I know where they are,’ Fritze said.
   ‘Who?’
   ‘All of them.’ He pulled Kirie away from a puddle. ‘Aunt Charly has been talking about Hanne Sobek for days, how she hopes the wedding guests will be gone in time.’
   ‘Hanne who?’
   ‘Do you live on the moon or something? Hanne who do you think? Hanne Sobek, half-back for Hertha. German champions in ’30 and ’33.’
   ‘Hertha, right. Football. They’re playing today?’
   ‘Sobek’s playing today, but not for Hertha. For a German invitational eleven against Glasgow Rangers.’
   ‘Glasgow what?’
   ‘You really don’t know much about football, do you?’
   ‘Well, you know how it is. Back in Dalldorf they were always packing us off to the opera, the theatre, Lunapark… there just wasn’t time for football.’ She nudged him in the side. ‘I’ve never been to a stadium.’
   ‘Me neither.’
   ‘Would you like to?’
   ‘Ask a silly question.’
   ‘Where are they playing?’
   ‘The Poststadion.’
   ‘In Moabit, right?’ She produced a twenty-mark note from her pocket. ‘How about it? It’s on me.’
   She still had to get used to the fact that she had money. Compensation for what Huckebein and the rest had done to her, Charly said.
   They left Kirie with the porter in Carmerstrasse. Fritze said he enjoyed it; the man even kept a dog bowl in his lodge. On Steinplatz they waved a taxi over. The driver looked at them suspiciously, but seeing Hannah’s twenty started the meter and drove off to arrive in good time for kick-off. The stadium was gradually filling, though puddles had formed on the playing surface. Under the large advertisement for Trumpf chocolate above the back straight, Hannah spotted a white woman’s hat. The four of them, as if they had arranged to meet in advance. She gave Fritze a nudge and pointed. The boy grinned. ‘See, told you so!’
   When they made their way across Charly looked surprised.‘You two?’
   ‘The others have gone,’ Fritze said. ‘No way we were bringing them.’
   ‘I’m just glad they didn’t kill each other,’ Charly said. ‘It’s much better like this. Finally, we can celebrate getting married in our own way!’ She sent the two men off to buy sausages and mustard while the teams were warming up.
   ‘That’s Sobeck there,’ Fritze said, pointing to a player in black-and-white. The men returned as the referee sounded his whistle.
   112
   The landscape held a strange fascination for Rath. He parked the black sedan and got out, looking across a thriving green expanse towards the horizon. It was still over twenty kilometres to Cambrai, but this was where it started: a wide strip, extending further than the eye could see, on which there were no trees and scarcely any houses. Once a lowland plain and flat, undulating coastland, it was now perforated by trenches and hollows of various sizes, the lunar landscape left by German and British artillery fifteen and more years ago. Nature had, by and large, reclaimed its territory. Pea-green grass covered the pock-marked countryside like a furry down, between bushes and young birch trees stretching their slender trunks towards the skies.
   He reached for Charly’s hand. She looked enchanting in the light summer dress she had bought in Paris. Following a path, they strolled across the pitted terrain like honeymooners exploring the Lüneburg Heath, coming upon the remains of an old trench, with wooden beams jutting out of the earth, moss-covered like treestumps. Rath looked inside and spotted an abandoned spade.
   ‘Do you think it’s German or French?’ Charly asked.
   ‘German probably. It’s what we used to dig all the trenches here.’
   Charly nodded pensively.‘And to kill one another.’
   ‘Pardon me?’
   ‘They were supposed to go after each other with their bayonets, but these quickly proved useless in the context of trench warfare. A spade was easier to handle. You didn’t have to pull it back out of your enemy once you’d stabbed him, you could just keep on fighting. Striking your opponent between the shoulder and neck was most effective. A sharpened spade was more than capable of decapitating someone, and if you missed the head you caught the artery.’
   Rath was horrified.‘How do you know all this?’
   ‘Remarque.’
   ‘Remarque? That’s propaganda, isn’t it? Roddeck never mentioned anything like that in his novel.’
   ‘First, Roddeck is a liar. Second, as a lieutenant he wouldn’t have much cause to defend himself in hand-to-hand combat.’
   ‘Perhaps he just chose not to write about it.’
   ‘Well, Remarque did, but no one in Germany will read him.’
   ‘If that’s the sort of stuff he writes, maybe it’s better that way.’ He took her hand and they strolled on. Gazing into the spring landscape he tried to dispel the terrible images she had planted in his mind.
   By now they had four carefree days in Paris behind them. The church wedding as well as the party afterwards had gone without a hitch. No rows, no political discussions, and no bridal kidnappings. Without Greta’s help that day, Rath would never have known where Paul and Charly had gone. Instinctively she had guided him to the Poststadion, where they saw the runaways getting out of a taxi. Football, of course. Even Fritze understood that Charly wanted to watch the game. As usual, Gereon Rath had been the last to know. It had turned into a lovely evening, even if the German eleven, having competed well enough to take a first-half lead, had been trounced 5-1 by the Scots.
   Like the civil ceremony, the reception that followed the church wedding in St Norbert’s (a no-frills affair thanks to Pastor Warszawski) saw the newlyweds make an early departure, although on this occasion it was planned. At Charly’s request they celebrated in the Tiergarten, in the Charlottenhof restaurant, and the two witnesses, Paul and Greta, accompanied them to Bahnhof Zoo. They spent their wedding night in a sleeper cabin belonging to theCompagnie Internationale des Wagon-Lits, trundling across the Rhine to alight from the Northern Express on Sunday afternoon in ParisGare du Nord, a city devoid of swastikas.
   Only in Paris did Rath realise how much Berlin had changed. Savouring their time, they were almost able to forget everything that had happened in Germany. Then, without having particularly discussed it, they hired a car from a garage near theCanal Saint-Martin, a pitch-black Citroën Rosalie that gleamed like a huge insect in the daylight, and took to the road.
   It was about three hours before the landscape between Amiens and Cambrai changed, and Rath started seeing familiar-looking village names. Then at some point, the sign:Neuville 3km. He parked. They got out.
   Now, strolling across this war-marked landscape, they sought to gain their bearings. The descriptions from Roddeck’s novel were out of date, but, all of a sudden, in the midst of this scarcely populated terrain, far from the nearest village, they realised where they were. The stone was visible from afar, though the forest Roddeck had written about must have fallen in the final two years of the war. Here, too, they found only furry down, a few bushes, young birch. It would be decades before nature reclaimed its territory, but it would. In the end, nature always won.
   The stone, a huge erratic boulder, would have withstood any artillery fire in history and was the perfect marker for a hoard of gold. Silently they scouted the terrain. Rath couldn’t help thinking about what had happened here sixteen years before, how many versions there were, and how all the witnesses but one were now dead.
   Back in the car they drove to Neuville. The village was smaller than he imagined from Roddeck’s description. The church that had been destroyed by British artillery fire had been rebuilt, and houses again stood on top of the old cellars and foundation walls. There wasn’t a single pre-war building that hadn’t been at least partly repaired, or, in some instances, completely restored. This place, truly, had been made good, just as nature all around the village stood in defiance to the ravages of war. They saw many fertile fields, even the odd fruit tree.
   The village school was housed in a new building. Rath parked outside, suspecting it had been built on the foundations of its predecessor, in which Roddeck’s unit had been billeted. The lieutenant himself had stayed in a bank director’s villa on the edge of the village. Engel, contrary to the novel’s claims, had taken up quarters with his driver in a little house next to the school.
   There was no longer any trace of the building Thelen had described. Only the cellar remained, spilling over with debris and anything else that couldn’t be used for rebuilding. Signs warned against entering the site, but Rath climbed down anyway. His French had always been lousy.
   Charly looked around anxiously, but it was lunch time and there wasn’t a soul to be seen save one or two curious faces at their windows. No one took exception to a stranger descending into the cellar and working his way through the rubble. The Citroën was brand new and had Paris plates. Possibly some official from the capital was at work.
   Rath tried to imagine how the house might have looked prior to its destruction, when stairs would have led down to the cellar. Then he saw the half-landing protruding from a mound of bricks. If this was the remains of the old staircase then… yes… here was the charred beam!
   Thelen’s description:a brick under the cellar stairs, that’s where he stowed everything before we set off on our rounds.
   Rath pulled the beam aside and cleared more debris, until he could access the brickwork under the stairs. He jolted each brick until, at last, one yielded. Pulling it out he discovered a hollow space and reached inside, thinking it had all been in vain as he grasped something cool, hard, metallic.
   Removing the tin can from its hiding place he opened it, finding an unfinished, handwritten letter and a dark notebook like those he had seen weeks before in a villa on the banks of the Rhine.
   He heard footsteps and started, and saw Charly’s quizzical face. She had overcome her reluctance to ignore the No Trespass signs. He showed her his find, she opened the book, and together they leafed through to the final page, the final entry.
   17th March 1917, early morning

   What a night! I haven’t slept a wink. There is no time to relate everything that has happened in the last twelve hours, but I will make up for it once we have effected our retreat and reached the Siegfried Line. When calm has been restored at last. The loyal Thelen has made coffee, and now I see Staff Sergeant Grimberg, our demolition expert, approaching from the other side of the road in his usual high spirits. It is time to inspect the trenches he has prepared, which we will now cede to the enemy, a final, deadly greeting from the German Reich! For now I must lay down my pen. I will write again soon.
   The inspiration for the hit TV series [Картинка: i_002.jpg] 
   1929: When a car is hauled out of the canal with a mutilated corpse inside, Detective Inspector Gereon Rath claims the case. Soon his inquiries drag him ever-deeper into Weimar Berlin’s underworld of cocaine, prostitution, gunrunning and shady politics.
   ‘The first in a series that’s been wildly popular cleverly captures the dark and dangerous period of the Weimer Republic before it slides into the ultimate evil of Nazism.’Kirkus Reviews [Картинка: i_003.jpg] 
   1930: Silent movie actress Betty Winter is killed on set after a lighting system falls on her. Inspector Gereon Rath suspects sabotage. Talkies are destroying careers in a world already bubbling with studio wars and sexual politics. Then another actress is found dead, this time with her vocal cords removed.
   ‘Set in atmospheric 1930s Berlin where a maverick detective is hunting a serial killerThe Silent Death, like its predecessor,Babylon Berlin, owes much to its author’s commitment to historical accuracy and the cynical feel of the times.’Peter James [Картинка: i_004.jpg] 
   1931: Abraham Goldstein, professional hit man, arrives in Berlin from New York. Gereon Rath is assigned to keep him out of action – a boring job when the city’s stores are being robbed, an underworld power struggle is playing out, and Nazi brownshirts are patrolling the streets. But Goldstein will surprise them all.
   ‘Goldstein is maybe the best of the series so far… like the bastard love child of Christopher Isherwood and Raymond Chandler.’CrimeReads [Картинка: i_005.jpg] 
   1932: A drowned man is found in a freight elevator in the giant pleasure palace on Potsdamer Platz, far from any standing water. Inspector Gereon Rath’s hunt for a mysterious contract killer has stalled, but this new case will take him to a small town on the Polish border and confrontation with the rising Nazi party.
   ‘The body count steadily mounts in Rath’s most complicated case to date.’Paul French, author ofMidnight in Peking
   Praise for the Gereon Rath series
   ‘Kutscher successfully conjures up the dangerous decadence of the Weimar years, with blood on the Berlin streets and the Nazis lurking menacingly in the wings.’The Sunday Times
   ‘Gripping evocative thriller set in Berlin’s seedy underworld during the roaring Twenties.’Mail on Sunday
   ‘Babylon Berlin brings a fresh perspective to images and material that might otherwise seem shopworn, and its frenetic rhythms are particularly apt for a moment when we appear to be dancing our own convulsive tango on the edge of a fiery volcano.’New York Review of Books
   ‘If you like crime, historical or translated fiction, this gives you all three.’Nicola Sturgeon
   ‘James Ellroy fans will welcome Kutscher’s series, a fast-paced blend of murder and corruption set in 1929 Berlin. Kutscher keeps the surprises coming and doesn’t flinch at making his lead morally compromised.’Publishers Weekly
   ‘The novels on which the dramas are based are even more rewarding than television’s slick production.’The New European
   ‘Gripping, skilfully plotted and rich in historical detail.’Mrs Peabody Investigates
   ‘Splendid and chilling… This is as good as Philip Kerr’s Bernie Gunther series.’Crime Time
   ‘Noir of exceptional quality… Truly entertaining and deliciously dark.’NB Magazine
   About the Author and the Translator
   Volker Kutscher was born in 1962. He studied German, Philosophy and History, and worked as a newspaper editor before publishingBabylon Berlin, first of the award-winning series of novels to feature Gereon Rath and Charlotte (Charly) Ritter and their exploits in 1930s Berlin. The Gereon Rath series was awarded the Berlin Krimi-Fuchs Crime Writers Prize in 2011 and has sold over one million copies worldwide. A lavish television production ofBabylon Berlin was first aired in 2017 in the UK on Sky Atlantic. Volker Kutscher works as a full-time author and lives in Cologne.
   Niall Sellar was born in Edinburgh in 1984. He studied German and Translation Studies in Dublin, Konstanz and Edinburgh, and has worked variously as a translator, teacher and reader. He lives in Glasgow.
   Also available from Sandstone Press
   Babylon Berlin (Der nasse Fisch)
   The Silent Death (Der stumme Tod)
   Goldstein (Goldstein)
   The Fatherland Files (Die Akte Vaterland)Other titles in the Gereon Rath series
   Lunapark (Lunapark)
   Marlow (Marlow)
   Copyright
   First published in Great Britain by
   Sandstone Press Ltd
   Suite 1, Willow House
   Stoneyfield Business Park
   Inverness
   IV2 7PA
   Scotland.
   www.sandstonepress.com
   All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored or transmitted in any form without the express written permission of the publisher.
   First published in the German language as“Märzgefallene” by Volker Kutscher
   © 2016/2014 Verlag Kiepenheuer& Witsch GmbH& Co.
   KG, Cologne/Germany
   © 2014 Volker Kutscher
   The right of Volker Kutscher to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs& Patents Act 1988.
   Translation© Niall Sellar 2020
   The translation of this work was supported by a grant from the Goethe Institut which is funded by the German Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
   ISBN: 978-1-913207-04-5
   ISBNe: 978-1-913207-05-2
   Cover design by Mark Swan
   Ebook compilation by Iolaire Typography, Newtonmore

Взято из Флибусты, http://flibusta.net/b/596523
