
   J. Manfred Weichsel
   EBU GOGO
   Acknowledgements: Special thank you to my beta readers Nathan Housley AKA The Pulp Archivist, Erik Johnson, and Jeff Stoner.Ebu Gogo would not be the book it is without you.
   Chapter 1
   Deep within a rainforest on the Indonesian island of Flores, two American college students, Martin and Amber, made their way in silence. It was hot and humid, and the jungle floor was dense with vegetation, making the going difficult. They were searching for creatures called ebu gogo, which neither of them actually believed existed.
   Amber suddenly stopped. She leaned her back against the trunk of a tree, gave Martin a seductive look, and said,“Just think. Here you are, out in the middle of a wild jungle, with no sign of civilization anywhere, all alone with four other women. Well? Hasn’t it given you any ideas?”
   Martin was aware of how handsome he was, with his fit build, sturdy shoulders, and jutting jaw, but he had always been uncomfortable around the opposite sex. He was stricken with a debilitating shyness that made it impossible for him to communicate with women.
   The blood rushed to Martin’s head and he began to breathe heavily. The big-breasted redhead was making him nervous the way she leaned against that tree, sticking her chest out at him, and he just wanted it to stop. He stammered a few times and finally mustered up the ability to say, “Of course not. We are interns, and as colleagues and peers it is important that we maintain a level of professionalism towards each other.”
   “That’s very mature of you,” she said wryly as she removed her back from the tree.
   “Thank you,” Martin said, hoping the beautiful redhead was finished with her flirting.
   They walked in silence for some time more and then Amber said,“What do you think of Linda?”
   He answered,“Linda is a capable and competent cryptozoologist, and I feel that I am in good hands as a member of her expedition.”
   “Well yes,” she replied cleverly, “but do you think she is pretty?”
   Martin choked up. The fact was that he did think Linda was pretty. True, at thirty-eight she was eighteen years his senior, but she still had the glow of youth about her. But Martin was much too shy to admit this so he said,“I haven’t really thought about it.”
   Martin wondered what his problem was. On the one hand, his heart was beating wildly and he wanted to grab Amber, throw her to the jungle floor, and climb on top of her, but on the other hand, he was paralyzed with fear. The worst part about it for Martin was that he wasn’t quite sure what, exactly, he was afraid of. Was it the sex act itself that scared him, or was he afraid of something buried deep within himself which being with a woman might unearth?
   Martin hated the fight or flight mode women always put him in. His entire life, he had always chosen flight. But then he suddenly wondered what would happen if this time he chose fight?
   After all, Amber had been flirting with him, hadn’t she? Or perhaps it would be more accurate to say she was toying with him. She knew he was afraid of her, and was having fun at his expense. But then again, did her motive really matter? Her flirtation was an invitation to act, whether it was made in sincerity or jest.
   But before Martin could act, before he could even make up his mind to act, from all around them came a high-pitched cry:“Yeyeyeyeyeyeye!!!!!”
   Martin, secretly grateful for the interruption, looked around in fright and said,“What was that?”
   Amber, also frightened by the call said,“I don’t know.”
   But before they could move, a group of very short bipedal creatures ran out from the jungle on all sides and surrounded them. The bipeds held stone-tipped spears, ready to throw them overhand at Martin and Amber like an Olympian throws a javelin.
   Martin and Amber both looked at the bipeds in shock. All were between three and four feet in height, and they were covered in orange fur. All were female, and all were naked except for decorative feathers and beads. They had primitive looking faces with no chins, fat-lipped mouths, broad noses, and backwards sloping foreheads. But their most prominent feature was certainly their breasts, which were enormous and hung straight down past their hips, some hanging all the way to their knees. Martin stammered and then said,“I don’t believe it. We’ve discovered the ebu gogo.”
   Another ebu gogo came out of the jungle, riding on the back of a five-foot-tall elephant. She was followed by many more ebu gogo that were on foot, all carrying stone-tipped spears.
   She rode her miniature elephant right up to Martin and Amber, and her enormous breasts hanging on both sides of the elephant swung back and forth with the motion of the beast like an extra pair of elephant ears. This ebu gogo was decorated more ornately than the rest, with many more colored feathers and beads. Sitting on the back of her elephant, she was slightly above eye level with Martin and Amber. She said,“Bahn.” And then when the two made no movement she repeated herself louder and more forcefully, “Bahn!”
   Amber said to Martin,“What does she want?”
   Martin said,“I think she wants us to go with her.”
   “Should we?”
   Martin did not know how to answer. They were surrounded by little creatures with spears, and he didn’t see any way they could escape.
   The one on the elephant said,“Doh tahr shaks.”
   Then, six ebu gogo threw their spears at once so that they just missed the two interns and struck the ground next to them, pierced the dirt, and remained lodged there at acute angles. The meaning was clear.
   Martin said,“I don’t think we have a choice. I mean, they are very small, but there are a lot of them. I wouldn’t want to be hit by one of those spears, let alone a whole bunch of them.”
   The one on the elephant said something and then the creatures surrounded Martin and Amber and prodded them with their spears. The two walked in the direction the ebu gogo wanted them to, as the ebu gogo continued to prod them along.
   As they went, Martin made many observations about the ebu gogo. He noted that they lifted their knees high off the ground with each step as they walked, so that when their feet were fully lifted off the ground their thighs were at a right angle with their torsos.
   Martin could not help but notice the sexual attributes of the ebu gogo. All were female, and despite their diminutive stature, all had nice, round hips and huge breasts that hung at least to their hips if not lower, that swung back and forth like pendulums as they walked. It was the first time in his life that he had ever looked at a living being the way a man is supposed to look at a woman. Even Amber wasn’t terribly attractive to him. He had only considered making a move on her because his pride had been hurt by her teasing. He wondered why he had never looked at a human woman the way he was looking at these nonhuman ones. Then it hit him. It was their fur that he found attractive.
   But then he shook himself out of it. They were animals. How could he think that about them? He decided that it must have been a mistake on his part, that he hadn’t really meant what he thought, but that he was just in panic mode from the situation he was in and panic was causing his mind to do strange things.
   The ebu gogo brought Martin and Amber to a cave. Having no other choice, they entered the cave with the creatures.
   Chapter 2
   Somewhere in Silver Lake, a hip and trendy neighborhood on the east side of Los Angeles, a taxi stopped in front of an open space on a street lined with Spanish palms, and Lewis Dare, a tall, muscular man of sixty, dressed in a Hawaiian shirt and slacks, jumped out, ran up to a small house, and knocked frantically on the door. It was the sunny, tranquil kind of day Los Angeles is known for.
   The door opened and Clare, a slim, beautiful, nineteen-year-old natural blonde, blinked her eyes in the sun, smiled brightly upon seeing Lewis standing in the doorway, and said,“Dad! Oh my God!!! I thought you were in New York!!!”
   Clare gave her father a big hug. Lewis just stood there with his arms at his sides and said,“Grab your toothbrush. We’re going to Indonesia. I’ll buy you clothes when we get there.”
   Clare, frowning, stepped back from her father and looked him straight in the eye.“I’m sorry Dad, but I can’t keep uprooting myself like this. I mean, what? I’ll cancel all my auditions, dump my boyfriend, and then I’ll come back to LA in three months and have to start over again from scratch? No way. I’d be happy to spend the day with you in LA and show you the sights, but I am not going to Indonesia.”
   Lewis said,“Come on. I don’t have time to argue. Clare, I just learned that Linda is in Indonesia, and if she discovers the ebu gogo before I do...”
   “What? Mom’s stealing your work? That bitch. Hold on.”
   Clare ran off and returned a moment later talking into her phone.“No, I won’t be able to go out with you next weekend either.”
   She held up her toothbrush with her free hand, smiled, and followed Lewis quickly across the street towards the waiting cab. Clare said calmly into the phone,“Well actually, we’re through," and hung up.
   Lewis opened the door for her and as Clare climbed into the cab she gave her father a disapproving look and said,“You see what you made me do Dad? Brandon could have been the one!”
   Less than an hour later Lewis and Clare sat in the soft, Corinthian leather seats of Lewis’s private jet, theDare to Discover, with papers spread out on folding trays in front of them, while outside a fuel truck slowly filled the tanks. Clare, who had been tapping away at her laptop, paused to sip from a sixteen-ounce energy drink through a red lipstick-stained straw.
   Lewis watched his daughter, thoughtfully. At nineteen, she had the enthusiasm for life of those who have lived long enough to experience life’s joys, but not its miseries.
   When Clare got excited about something, she became even more hyper and talked even more rapidly than usual. Also, energy drinks made her a bit speedy. She said,“OK, so most of the scientists on this list look like total jerks, but there is one, Michael Stern, who I think you can work with. Get this! Over twenty years ago he wrote a paper called ‘The Descendants of Pongo Abelii.’ In the paper he argues that Homo sapiens evolved from orangutans, as opposed to chimpanzees.”
   Lewis smiled, almost impressed.“But that’s absurd. Human beings evolved from chimpanzees. It’s an established fact. Humans and chimpanzees share ninety-nine percent of their DNA.”
   “He accounts for that too. He writes that chimpanzees and humans share so much DNA because chimpanzees actually devolved from an isolated population of humans who reverted to apehood. The paper almost ruined his career, and he eventually had to recant it so he could get work.”
   Clare slid her laptop over to her father so he could read the article. With a single finger, as if he wanted to touch the article as little as possible, he slid the laptop back over to his daughter and said,“I don’t need a fucking baby sitter.”
   “No, Dad, listen to me. Do you remember last year when your book about the Lake Champlain monster came out? Everybody said, ‘Oh, he just made it up. He’s a billionaire so he must have given the publisher a lot of money and then they must have just taken the money and published the book without bothering to verify Lewis Dare’s findings.’”
   “Yes. I remember. Those ignorant assholes. But then once they saw the giant scale I found they all shut up pretty fast.”
   “Well, you can’t expect to get lucky twice in a row. If you bring a PhD along with you to verify your findings this time, the public will have to believe you. Look, I hate academia as much as you do. Those mother fuckers have ruined Western thought. But rules are rules. You need to bring a PhD and I’m telling you, this is your guy!”
   Clare slid the laptop back over to Lewis and said,“Read the article. You’ll dig it. It’s totally weird.”
   Lewis looked at the title page of the article with distaste and reluctantly began reading. About halfway through the article he looked up from the computer screen and exclaimed,“Clare, this is fascinating! It’s brilliant. Damn the scientific community for rejecting this.”
   Just then the pilot’s voice came on through the intercom. “Refueling is complete, sir. Where would you like to go next?”
   Lewis turned to his daughter.“Clare, where does Dr. Stern live?”
   “London.”
   Before long theDare to Discover was flying eastward across the continental US towards the Atlantic Ocean.
   Chapter 3
   The Indonesian rainforest was in a constant state of dusk because of the canopy of leaves overhead that blocked out most of the light from the sun. Martin had thought that stepping from the forest into the cave would have been like stepping from dusk into darkness, but instead it was merely like stepping from dusk into a darker twilight.
   The stone walls of the cave were covered with foot-long phosphorescent slugs that lit the interior with an eerie dark purple glow. Two ebu gogo in the front grabbed a slug each and used them to lead the way for the others.
   More ebu gogo joined them, and with the tips of dozens of spears pressed up against the bodies of Martin and Amber, they forced them to march through the twisting caves deeper and deeper into the earth and then into a small cavern. There, the ebu gogo forced the trembling, terrified Amber up against a wall at spear point and a bunch of them made quick work cutting her clothes from her body with the stone tips of their spears, until she was dressed in nothing but her pith helmet and her boots. Three ebu gogo then climbed all over her body, inspecting her all over, as Amber screamed and screamed.
   The three ebu gogo grabbed at Amber’s large, gravity-defying breasts with their little toddler-like hands, shook their heads, and said disappointedly, “Bee-bee. Ne bee-bee, ne.”
   Then, the three ebu gogo poked her vagina through its bush of shiny red hair with their little toddler-like fingers, shook their heads, and said even more disappointedly,“Coo-coo. Ne coo-coo, ne.”
   Amber sobbed as her entire body trembled. She was now too traumatized to scream.
   The three ebu gogo stepped away from Amber. The ebu gogo leader said,“Doh tahr shak.”
   The ebu gogo that had been addressed brought her spear arm back. Martin, seeing that the creature was about to hurl its spear right at Amber, dove and tackled the spear wielding ebu gogo before it could throw.
   The ebu gogo then forced Martin to his feet and up against the wall with their spears and cut his clothes from his body as they had done to Amber, until he was naked except for his pith helmet and boots. Three ebu gogo climbed all over his body. They grabbed at his hard pectoral muscles with their little hands and said excitedly,“Che-che. Ya che-che, ya.”
   Then they poked and flicked his penis with their little fingers and said even more excitedly,“Wa-wa. Ya wa-wa, ya.”
   Then, in the dark purple glow of the cavern, dozens of ebu gogo pressed their tiny spears against Martin’s flesh and forced him to the ground. Martin’s eyes bulged with terror.
   The ebu gogo leader dismounted her miniature elephant. Her breasts were even larger than the breasts of the other ebu gogo, and hung almost to her feet. She approached Martin and mounted him, resting the bottoms of her low-hanging breasts in two piles on his chest. His dick grew hard and she easily got it inside herself, and rode his cock with slow, rhythmic motions. The other ebu gogo continued to hold Martin to the ground at spear point. But soon the ones with the spears relaxed and stepped back. The fear had left Martin’s face and was replaced by a look of intense pleasure. It was obvious to these primitive creatures that Martin was enjoying what was happening.
   Once the spears were removed from Martin’s body, he flipped over so that he was on top of the ebu gogo. Her enormous breasts spread out on either side of her like two scrolls unrolling across the floor. To Martin they looked like an angel’s wings.
   Martin fucked the three and a half foot tall fur covered ebu gogo with abandon as she leaned her head back and moaned. Amber screamed,“Martin, what the fuck are you doing? Stop!”
   But Martin did not hear her. He was too lost in the sex act. He was so unaware of his surroundings that he wasn’t even a little bit self-conscious of his ridiculous looking scrunched-up orgasm face.
   Martin ejaculated inside of the humanoid creature, collapsed on top of her in exhaustion, and then after a few moments had gone by, rolled to her side, resting his head on one of her breasts that was spread across the floor as if it were a long pillow.
   The animal at his side had a satisfied look on its nonhuman face, and as Martin looked at that face, a horrified look came onto his own. The ebu gogo ran one of its little hands through his hair. Trembling, his face suddenly drained of color, he muttered,“My God. My God. What have I done? What have I done?”
   Martin got up and backed away from the ebu gogo and screeched,“I have had sex with an animal. Oh my God. I have committed an act of bestiality.”
   The ebu gogo got up off the ground and approached him lovingly as her breasts that hung almost to her feet gently swayed back and forth. He backed away in horror and revulsion and cried,“Go away. Go away! Leave me be. Leave me be!”
   Martin’s face was red, tears streamed from his eyes, and snot dribbled from his chin. The ebu gogo Martin had just had sex with said something to the others and the ebu gogo all turned and left the small room where they were. Some remained outside the room and guarded it with their little tiny spears.
   Chapter 4
   Lewis and Clare exited the tube station and walked down Cromwell Road towards the Museum of Natural History, London. Lewis left Clare at the steps and entered the museum. Inside, he waited for a guard to pass and entered a door marked“Restricted Access.” He climbed down a few flights of cement stairs and made his way through the dark, dank basement of the museum. Strange and mysterious artifacts were strewn about everywhere.
   Lewis came to the door he had been looking for and opened it, revealing Michael Stern, PhD, bent over a canvas, arranging the tagged, fossilized bones of a primitive human. Dr. Stern did not notice Lewis standing in the doorway, so Lewis took the opportunity to study the man. Even alone as he thought he was, Dr. Stern exuded a bitter contempt for the rest of the world. He was a man in his early forties, someone who should be in the middle of raising a family and enjoying all the benefits that come with being gainfully employed and in the prime of life. But the deep lines on his face and the downward curve of his mouth showed him to be a loner in the extreme.
   Finally noticing the presence of another person in his personal space, Dr. Stern stood up from his work, faced the tall, muscular middle-aged man that stood in the doorway, and said rather curtly,“I’m sorry. This area is closed to museum guests.”
   “Are you Dr. Michael Stern, PhD? My name is Lewis Dare. I would like to have a word with you.”
   “There is a sign-up sheet outside my office.”
   “I’m sure there is, but I’m in a hurry.”
   Dr. Stern replied,“I’m sorry. I forgot to speak to you in American," adopted an American accent, and said in his most polite and pleasant tone of voice, “Fuck off, please. I’m busy.”
   Lewis chuckled and said,“My, you Brits have the driest sense of humor,” and entered the small room, which was stuffed with fossils of various extinct species of hominids. “I leave tomorrow morning for Indonesia, where I plan to discover the ebu gogo. If you come with me, I am prepared to pay you one million dollars for your services.”
   Dr. Stern ignored the absurd figure, gave Lewis an incredulous look, and said,“Excuse me? What is an ebu gogo?”
   “In 2004, archeologists on the Indonesian island of Flores dug up a fossil that, although it was shaped like an adult man, was only three feet tall. They continued to dig in the area and found many more fossils, all adult, and all between three and four feet in height. They realized that they haddiscovered an entirely new dwarf species in the genus of Homo, and they named the species Homo floresiensis. The Homo floresiensis died out a scant twelve thousand years ago. But natives on the island of Flores tell stories of little creatures they call the ebu gogo, which bear a striking resemblance to the Homo floresiensis.”
   Dr. Stern looked Lewis over suspiciously.“Just what is your field?”
   “Cryptozoology.”
   Dr. Stern straightened his back, stuck his nose in the air, and said stiffly,“I am already employed by the Museum of Natural History, and I am not going to destroy my reputation by going on an expedition with a cryptozoologist. Please leave.”
   “I understand your concern, but you should know that cryptozoology has gained much mainstream acceptance over the past decade.”
   “Not in Great Britain, fortunately. I have been very patient with you, but if you don’t leave now, I will call security.”
   “You have all day to think my offer over. Please, take my card.”
   Lewis handed Dr. Stern his card, which read“Lewis Dare, Cryptozoologist, Nutritionist, Author, Life Coach, and Most Brilliant Man in the World,” and departed. Dr. Stern stood there for a moment after Lewis left looking at the card in disbelief. He shook his head and muttered, “Americans.”
   Lewis left the Museum of Natural History in a huff. He was a man who was not accustomed to hearing no, and on the rare occasion that somebody did tell him no, he retaliated in the vicious, no-holds-barred manner of the billionaire class of which he was a part. He stormed down the wide stone stairway to Clare, who sat on a step eating fish and chips out of a greasy white paper basket decorated with red crisscrossing lines, and demanded,“What’s the number of the museum director again?”
   Clare looked up at her father, shocked.“Dad, you’re not really going to do that?”
   Lewis grabbed Clare’s bag in his large hands and rummaged through it. Clare put aside her basket of fish and chips and grabbed and slapped at her father’s muscular arms and shoulders with her greasy little hands as she cried, “Dad, stop it! You never go through a lady’s purse!”
   Lewis turned the purse upside down and shook it, and condoms, loose tampons, and little bags of recreational drugs spilled out everywhere, along with a scrap of paper with a phone number scribbled on it. Lewis grabbed the paper and took out his phone.
   Red-faced, Clare knelt and quickly gathered up her things as she muttered,“Ugh. This is a new low, even for you. There is something called Karma you know, and this is going to come back to bite you in the ass.”
   Lewis dialed his phone and waited a moment before speaking.“Hello, may I speak with the museum director… Hello… My name isn’t important… I have some disturbing information about the person in charge of your upcoming Charles Darwin exhibit… Yes, Dr. Stern. Did you know that he once argued that chimpanzees devolved from an isolated population of human beings…? You didn’t? Well, I doubt people would like to know that the person arranging your Charles Darwin exhibit holds such unorthodox beliefs… You want proof? Well, if you give me your email address I can forward you this article he wrote…”
   Later that evening, Lewis walked down a hall of the Wilton Hotel, London, took out a key card, and entered the penthouse suite. He stepped into his private bedroom and flipped on the lights revealing a skinny, effete man in his mid-twenties, with wet hair as if he had just taken a shower, reclining on Lewis’s bed, wearing Lewis’s bathrobe, and nothing else. Lewis jumped. “Jack Holland?”
   Jack sat up, faced Lewis, smiled maliciously, and said,“Hello, Lewis.”
   Jack’s voice had always gotten on Lewis’s nerves. It was high pitched and breathy, and Jack spoke in a distant, insincere manner that made it sound like he was acting. Pointing at the door Lewis said, “Get the fuck out of my room.”
   Undeterred, Jack said,“I heard that you are planning an expedition to Indonesia, and I am wondering why I wasn’t invited.”
   “I didn’t invite you because you were worthless on my last expedition.”
   Just then Lewis’s phone rang. He answered. “Ah! Hello... You have changed your mind? Excellent! Meet me at the Sir Arthur Conan Doyle Airport, platform J at 10:50 AM. It’s a private airport.”
   Lewis hung up his phone glowing with triumph, but was immediately deflated when Jack remarked,“That would be the scientist you got fired." Lewis looked at Jack, astounded. Jack continued in the same casually malicious tone. “It’s amazing what you can do nowadays. I hacked your cell phone and have been listening in on all your conversations. Lewis, why are you trying to ruin that poor scientist’s career?”
   “That question does not dignify a response.”
   “But I have you by the testicles.”
   Lewis sighed.“Twenty years ago Dr. Stern possessed a brilliant mind. But his creativity was crushed by the arrogance of the scientific community. I am not trying to ruin Dr. Stern’s career. I want to save it.”
   Jack took a tablet from the bathrobe’s pocket, turned it on, and handed it to Lewis.
   Lewis took the tablet and saw a photograph of a giant green scale sitting behind exhibition glass.
   Jack said,“Swipe.”
   Lewis swiped and saw a diagram describing how to fabricate a giant scale. His heart skipped a beat. He swiped again and saw drawings that were concept art used to design the fake scale. Lewis swiped a few more times and looked up and said,“You aren’t supposed to have this. You were supposed to have deleted all of it.”
   Jack said,“Oh, come on Lewis. Did you really think I wouldn’t keep the evidence, even if it were merely for the sake of insurance?”
   Lewis said,“What do you want? I already paid you off.”
   “I don’t want money this time. If it ever got out that you forged your famous scale from the Lake Champlain monster, nobody would ever believe one of your claims again. And unless you bring me with you to Indonesia as a member of your team, this will be all over the internet where anybody can see it.”
   Chapter 5
   Even deep within the jungle as they were, Linda did not have a single blond hair out of place beneath her pith helmet. Her makeup was perfectly applied, and she knew in her heart that the interns, the female ones at any rate, were jealous of her ability to keep her hair and makeup perfect in the humidity and sweltering heat of the rainforest.
   Linda had a very particular style of leadership. When everybody under Linda was good, and gave her what she wanted, she treated everybody well. But when one or a few of those under Linda were bad, and did not give her what she wanted, she treated everybody horribly.
   Amber and Martin were very bad. Linda wanted them to be here at base camp, but they had not returned yet from searching for ebu gogo. Because Amber and Martin were not here, and Bethany and Christa were, it was Bethany, a vaguely ethnic looking woman, and Christa, a brunette, who had to bear the brunt of Linda’s rage.
   Linda screamed, shouted, and raged at her two interns in a profane rant. She cursed, she swore, and eventually, the two young women both broke into tears.
   Bethany, through her heavy sobs, managed to say,“I have never been spoken to like this in my entire life!”
   Christa said between her sobs,“I am completely humiliated.”
   Linda looked unsympathetically at her two crying interns and said,“Oh come on, suck it up. So I said a few bad words. It’s not the end of the world.”
   Bethany cried even harder and said,“Oh my God, oh my God, oh my God, she told me to suck it up!!!”
   Christa looked up at Linda through her tears and said,“I can’t believe you said that!”
   Linda looked at the two interns, confused.“Said what? ‘Suck it up?’ What’s wrong with ‘suck it up?’”
   The two interns broke into even heavier sobs and both cried simultaneously,“Oh my God she said it again!”
   Then, Linda heard a rustling in the bushes. She held up a hand and said,“Shut up.”
   The interns sobbed even harder, held each other in their arms, and both cried together,“She told us to shut up!”
   Linda held up her hand and said,“Shush. I heard something. I want to go investigate.”
   The interns just sat there crying. Linda changed her tone and said,“Come on. Every moment we waste on something like this is a moment we are not searching for ebu gogo, and if Lewis discovers the ebu gogo before I do because I had to deal with your emotional needs, I am going to say a lot worse to you than ‘suck it up.’ Now let’s go.”
   Linda went to the bush where she had heard the rustling. The two interns wiped their tears and followed Linda, who bent down and said,“Look at these tracks. Let’s follow them.”
   Christa said,“But shouldn’t one of us wait here in case Amber and Martin return?”
   Linda said,“No. We can look for them while we follow these tracks. Come on.”
   Linda walked off following the tracks on the ground, and Bethany and Christa followed.
   Soon, they came to a spot where six tiny spears stuck from the ground at acute angles. Linda said,“What the…”
   Suddenly from all around them came the war cry of the ebu gogo,“Yeyeyeyeyeyeye!!!!”
   Linda took out a recorder, pressed a button, said,“November twenty, 2:00 PM,” and held it up into the air. The war cry of the ebu gogo came again, “Yeyeyeyeyeyeye!!!!”
   The call stopped and Bethany said,“What is it?
   Linda said,“I don’t know.”
   Then, about twenty little bipedal creatures rushed into the clearing from the jungle beyond and surrounded the three women with spears held overhand, ready to hurl them.
   They were all three to four feet in height, and covered in orange fur. All were female. Linda said,“I don’t believe it. I’ve discovered the ebu gogo!”
   The ebu gogo spoke excitedly to each other in their language as they separated the three human women until each woman was completely surrounded by ebu gogo.
   The ebu gogo surrounding the vaguely ethnic Bethany spoke to each other rapidly and then poked her clothes with their spears, making little cuts in her clothes here and there.
   Bethany yelled,“Shoot them.”
   Linda said,“Keep calm!”
   The ebu gogo made quick work cutting Bethany’s clothes, until she was completely naked except for her pith helmet and boots. Her brown nipples became erect and goose bumps formed on her olive-colored breasts.
   Linda said,“They’re just curious. Don’t make any sudden movements.”
   Then, three ebu gogo climbed all over Bethany’s body. Bethany trembled with fear. The three ebu gogo touched Bethany’s olive colored breasts with their little toddler-like hand and said, “Bee-bee. Ne bee-bee, ne.”
   Then, they poked her vagina through its thick, black hair, shook their heads, and said,“Coo-coo. Ne coo-coo, ne.”
   The three ebu gogo climbed off of Bethany’s body and then one of them looked at one who held a spear and said, “Doh tahr shak.”
   The ebu gogo that had been addressed hurled her spear overhand at Bethany. Bethany screamed as the spear sped through the air and pierced her heart. Linda and Christa stood in shocked silence as Bethany fell to the ground face down, dead, the spear point sticking out of her back.
   Linda shouted,“Fuck,” took her gun out of its holster, pointed it at the ebu gogo that had just killed Bethany, and pulled the trigger. The ebu gogo Linda shot fell down, dead. The rest of the ebu gogo fell to the ground at the sound of the gunshot, kicked their legs into the air, waved their arms in panic, and screamed, “Eeeeeee!!!! Eeeeeee!!!!! Eeeeeee!!!!!”
   Linda yelled,“Run,” and Linda and Christa took off running. The spear held by an ebu gogo that lay on her back screaming happened to swing and hit Linda’s hand as she exited the clearing, knocking the gun from her grip. Linda turned to retrieve her gun, but she didn’t see where it had landed. She did see, however, that the ebu gogo were beginning to recover from the shock of the sound of the gun, so she and Christa ran blindly into the jungle.
   Meanwhile, in the clearing, a few ebu gogo recovered before the rest. They spoke briefly to one another, tossed their enormous low-hanging breasts over their shoulders to keep them from getting in their way, and ran off in their high-stepped gait after Linda and Christa, crying the war cry of the ebu gogo,“Yeyeyeyeyeyeye!!!!!!”
   Linda and Christa ran through the jungle in a blind panic, not stopping for low brush and shoving vines out of their way as they went. Both could hear the war cry of the ebu gogo as it grew closer, and closer. The ebu gogo were gaining on them.
   Then, Linda felt a sting in the back of her neck. She reached back and removed a wooden dart. As she looked at it, she suddenly grew dizzy and then everything went black. A dart hit Christa in the back of her neck. She tumbled to the ground and lay there completely still. The ebu gogo gathered around the two passed out women and it took six ebu gogo to lift each woman from the ground.
   They began to carry the two women through the jungle, and were having so much trouble that they called out into the jungle in their strange, murmuring language for more ebu gogo to join them. More ebu gogo did, and they all gathered together and carried the passed out blonde and brunette crowd surfing style back to their cave.
   Chapter 6
   Clare, Lewis, and Dr. Stern sat towards the front of theDare to Discover, which sat on the runway at the Sir Arthur Conan Doyle Airport. Dr. Stern looked back with distaste at three other individuals sitting together close to the back. The first was a tall and skinny young man, the next was a short and overweight young man, and the third was a petite young Asian woman. All three looked like they were in their early twenties. Dr. Stern turned to Lewis and hazarded to ask,“Who are they?”
   “Don’t worry about them. They’re just interns I picked up at USC the other day.”
   Dr. Stern answered dryly,“I see.”
   Jack Holland entered the plane from the back with his usual buoyant gait and sat down in an empty seat. Clare’s blue eyes widened with shock. She rose from her seat, marched up to Jack, and gave him a glare that would have terrified any ordinary man as she shouted, “Jack! What in Hell are you doing here!?!”
   Jack looked up at her with a big smile and replied,“Didn’t your father tell you? I am coming with you to Indonesia.”
   “Like Hell you are!" Clare turned abruptly and marched back to her father, calling, “Dad! Daddy! Daddy!!!”
   When she reached Lewis, he turned, raised an eyebrow, and innocently said,“Yes, Clare?”
   “Daddy!!! Why is Jack here!?!”
   “Mr. Holland is here because he has proven himself to be a valuable member of my team.”
   Clare stomped her foot.“Oh my God dad you don’t understand. You never understand! He’s a fucking furry!”
   “Yes, you have told me that before, but what you won’t tell me is what a furry is.”
   “That’s because it’s none of your business!”
   “Clare, whatever happened between you two is long in the past. You are both grown adults, and I am sure everything will be all right.”
   Clare muttered“I’ve got to get off this plane," turned, and made her way to the door of the jet. But as she did, the jet began to travel down the runway. Clare pulled frantically at the handle of the door.
   When he realized what she was trying to do, Lewis ran up to his daughter.“Clare, the door won’t open while the plane is moving.”
   Clare cried out,“Oh my God I can’t believe this," and yanked at the handle even harder.
   Lewis shouted,“Clare, the plane is about to take off!”
   Jack approached Clare with a cocky swagger and said,“Clare, my rabbit, what’s wrong? You should be happy to see me.”
   Clare turned to Jack and screamed,“I am not a rabbit!”
   Jack replied,“Shhh. Rabbits don’t talk.”
   Clare screamed. The plane increased in speed and began to rumble. Clare pulled as hard as she could at the handle of the door. Lewis nervously said,“Clare, you really need to sit down.”
   Clare ignored her father and continued to pull frantically at the handle as the plane rose from the ground. Before long theDare to Discover was flying South-East towards Indonesia with its seven passengers, Lewis, Dr. Stern, Clare, Jack, and the three interns.
   The blue sky changed to black. Clare had locked herself in the bathroom shortly after takeoff. Lewis knocked on the bathroom door and said,“Clare.” There was no answer so Lewis knocked again and said, “Clare honey, you can’t stay in there the entire trip.” When there still wasn’t any answer Lewis said, “Other people are going to have to use the bathroom.”
   Clare shouted back at him from behind the locked door,“I don’t care. Fuck off.”
   “Clare, look, I’m sorry. Perhaps it would help if you told me exactly what happened between you and Jack.”
   Clare angrily shouted,“What do you think happened between me and Jack?”
   “I think you two were really good friends, and then something happened and you weren’t really good friends anymore.”
   Clare opened the door, gave her father a pitying look, shook her head, and lovingly said,“Oh my God Dad, you are so naive.”
   Meanwhile, Dr. Stern sat reading the bestselling work of cryptozoology,The Mystery of Lake Champlain by Lewis Dare, shaking his head in disbelief.
   Having patched things up with his daughter, Lewis, his chest puffed out in pride, walked up to Dr. Stern and said,“So, has my book caused you to revise your opinion about cryptozoology?”
   Dr. Stern closed the book, put it down on the tray in front of him, turned to Lewis, furrowed his brow, and said,“No. Who on Earth would take such rubbish seriously? The prose is purple, the first three chapters are nothing but you going on and on in a self-aggrandizing manner about your brilliance as a scientist, you make outrageous statements throughout with no evidence provided to back them up other thanwhat you claim to have witnessed while alone, there is a preposterous murder-mystery subplot that has no place in a scientific work, and most egregious of all, it isn’t even peer reviewed.”
   Lewis answered,“Peer review is elitism, plain and simple.”
   Dr. Stern snapped back,“Well, scientists are elite! Peer review is our way of keeping junk science like this out.”
   “Mainstream scientists are arrogant, but that doesn’t make you elite.”
   “You are the one who would pay an unseemly amount of money to bring a ‘mainstream scientist’ along on a vanity project.”
   “I had to bring you along, because you academics control the entire scientific culture. You control the universities, the publishing houses, and all the government boards. You have armies of nonprofits to back up every little thing you say. You have convinced the public that yours is the first and the last word on everything scientific, and that if somebody doesn’t belong to your little PhD club then nothing he says is worth a damn unless he slavishly agrees with you. So unfortunately, I needed to bring a scientist with me in order to be listened to and believed.”
   “Well, Mr. Dare, since you have told me what you think of scientists, let me tell you what I think of you. You are a very wealthy man, and like many in your economic class, you want to pay to be something you’re not. Some rich people simply want to be gardeners, so instead of getting on their knees and getting their hands dirty, they hire people whom they call ‘landscapers’ to do all the work, and then once the landscapers finish their work and go home, the rich people who hired them get to show off their gardens and call themselves gardeners. Other rich people want to be authors or filmmakers, so they pay others to write novels or make movies for them, which they then claim as their own. In your case you want to be a scientist, and instead of doing the work to become one, you hire professionals, like me, to do the work for you, so that you can take the credit. But because you just buy your way in and are unwilling to do any work, you never learn, and you never improve your craft, and the result is garbage books like this one.”
   Lewis answered,“Well you’re the one who took my money, so you’re not in a position to complain. And anyway, that book you are talking about has sold over one million copies. One million readers can’t be wrong.”
   TheDare to Discover landed in the Jakarta International Airport on the Indonesian island of Java. Lewis spent a few days there buying clothes, gear, and supplies. Then, once everything was ready, he chartered a boat to the island of Flores.
   As they stood around the busy port waiting to board the boat, Clare pulled her father aside and said,“I’m sorry Dad. I don’t think I can go with you to Flores. I think I am going to stay at a hotel in Java and wait for you to come back.”
   Surprised and disappointed, Lewis asked,“Why?”
   “Because of Jack! I just don’t want to be around him.”
   Lewis smiled and said,“Clare, that’s no reason to stay behind. All you will be doing is letting Jack have all the fun while you are miserable. Just think of all the adventure we will have! We are going to a rainforest to search for an exotic and undiscovered species in the genus of Homo which may be one of the last remaining remnants of our evolutionary past. Why would you allow Jack to have that, while you spend the trip cooped up in some hotel?”
   Clare agreed to go to Flores, and they boarded the boat. As it traveled across the aquamarine sea, an emerald jewel slowly became visible in the distance. It was the Island of Flores, rising out of the water as if to greet them. White mist rose from the rainforest that covered most of the island. Facing them was a beach of a striking shade of white.
   The boat changed course to go around the island, and then stopped a distance from a port. The port they had left had been huge and bustling, full of people from all corners of the earth, and was modernly equipped. But this port was nothing more than a rickety wooden and bamboo pier, and was too small and in too shallow water for the large boat to approach. So Lewis, Clare, Dr. Stern, Jack, and the three interns climbed into a smaller boat that had been lowered into the water, and one of the crewmembers steered it towards the port.
   The tiny boat dropped the seven off on the pier and returned to the boat, which would return to pick them up in exactly one week.
   Chapter 7
   Mere moments had passed since the ebu gogo left Martin and Amber alone in the little cavern, and Martin lay on the ground, sobbing in shame at the sordid act he had just committed. When he looked up at Amber and saw the horrified way the redhead stared at him, a feeling of humiliation was added to his shame. He said,“Amber, don’t look at me like that.”
   She cried,“You disgust me.”
   He stood up and approached her,“Please Amber. I need you to understand.”
   She backed away from him and cried,“Stay away!”
   He reached out a hand towards her and said,“Amber.”
   She pulled away her arm and cried,“Don’t touch me.”
   Martin said,“Let me explain.”
   “Shut up.”
   “But I need to talk to you. I don’t understand what got into me. I… I felt such a strange feeling. I’ve never felt anything like it before. Never towards a human woman.”
   Amber screamed,“You fucking freak!”
   Martin said,“Amber, please. I need you to listen.”
   Amber shrieked,“Shut up! Shut up! Shut up! Seriously, I do not want to talk to you. Let’s sit on opposite sides of the cavern and not talk. We have nothing to say to one another.”
   Both sat in opposite corners of the cavern in silence for some time.
   Then they heard the murmuring of ebu gogo as they came through the caves towards the cavern where they were being kept. The ebu gogo entered the small cavern and placed Linda and Christa on the ground.
   The leader was with them, sitting again on top of her little elephant. She commanded something in the ebu gogo language and some ebu gogo with stone knives approached the two passed-out women and cut the clothes from their bodies. Then, the ebu gogo crawled all over them. When the ebu gogo touched Christa’s perky, teardrop shaped breasts and Linda’s full breasts with their little hands they said, “Bee-bee. Ne bee-bee, ne.” And when they poked Christa’s and Linda’s vaginas through their brown and blond bushes with their little fingers they shook their heads and said, “Coo-coo. Ne coo-coo, ne.”
   Then when they were done the ebu gogo stepped back and the leader said,“Doh tahr shaks.”
   Martin cried,“Ne, shaks, ne.”
   The leader looked at Martin and then at the ebu gogo and repeated,“Ne shaks, ne.”
   The leader turned and rode her elephant from the cavern and the rest of the ebu gogo followed her, taking the cut up clothes with them.
   Amber was so shocked that she momentarily forgot that she was disgusted with Martin. She said,“How… How… You know their language?”
   “No.”
   “Then… then how did you know to say that?”
   “By listening to them and picking up things from context. You… you’re looking at me in disbelief. You can’t do that?”
   “N… No.”
   Martin gave Amber a pleading look and said,“When Linda and Christa wake up don’t… don’t tell them about what I did.”
   “I… I can’t promise that.”
   “Please. I am ashamed of what I have done. I want to put it in my past. If you tell them, I will never be able to put it behind me. I will have to live with it for the rest of my life. Please let me put it behind me.”
   Amber looked at Martin and suddenly felt very sorry for him. She said,“OK. I promise on one condition.”
   “What’s that?”
   “That you never, ever have sex with an ebu gogo again.”
   “I am disgusted with myself because of what I have done. I promise. I will never have sex with an ebu gogo again.”
   Chapter 8
   Chief Bononbun of the Keo people stood at the edge of the pier watching the small boat approach. A little over a month ago, he had never seen a white person before. But then Linda and her people arrived. They were so sophisticated, and Bononbun was embarrassed because of his simple nature. Before she left to go into the jungle, Linda had told Bononbun that more white people would be arriving shortly, so he set himself to the task of learning proper English, so that he would not have to communicate with them in the pidgin language that was the only English he knew.
   Once the seven white people were all on the dock, well actually one of them wasn’t white but looked sort of yellow-brown, Bononbun approached to greet them. He had spent all morning having the women of the village work on his kinky hair, so that now it stuck out in all directions like a crown of feathers. He had put a fresh, newly bleached bone through his pierced septum, and the piece of coarse cloth tied around his waist with a leather string was also brand new. He wore a necklace of human teeth that an ancestor of his eight generations removed had taken from the mouths of his enemies. Modern Keo didn’t have enemies to kill and eat like their ancestors did, and that necklace, a relic from the old days of cannibalism, was among his most treasured possessions.
   Chief Bononbun had an enormous grin on his face as he approached the visitors. This was the moment when he would see if all that time spent learning English would result in the kind of speech he hoped for. He said,“Welcome, most illustrious travelers, to my grand village. I am Chief Bononbun, leader of the Keo people who live here. We are honored to have you grace us with your presences.”
   Lewis Dare stepped forward with his hand outstretched and said,“And I am Lewis Dare, from New York. And this is my daughter Clare who lives in Los Angeles, this is Dr. Stern from London, this is Jack, and these are my three interns.”
   Chief Bononbun took Lewis’s large, strong hand and shook it vigorously. He said, “Ah yes, Lewis Dare, the great, how do you say that word, cryptozookeeper!”
   “Cryptozoologist,” Lewis corrected him.
   Chief Bononbun was embarrassed. He repeated the word silently to himself the way Lewis had pronounced it and then he said,“Ah yes. My apologies. Cryptoventriloquist! Please, as a token of our gratitude, allow us to present, for your entertainment, a sacred ritual dance based on the ancient principle of Kastom.”
   Chief Bononbun clapped his large chocolate-colored hands together and stepped aside. Men standing in two lines facing each other began to bang on all sorts of drums with their hands as well as drumsticks of different shapes and designs, and about fifteen women who were standing in three rows between the two lines of drummers began to jump up and down and whoop and holler in an atonal cacophony.
   Like the men, the women wore nothing but pieces of coarse cloth tied around their waists. Many of them were very young, young enough to make Lewis, Dr. Stern, and the two male interns a little uncomfortable watching them and their small breasts which held firm as they jumped up and down, jumping being the only piece of choreography in this primitive dance.
   Once he was satisfied that his guests had been sufficiently entertained, Chief Bononbun clapped his hands and the dance abruptly stopped. He said to Lewis,“So, how did you like it? Are not the Keo people the greatest dancers in the Kepulauan Nusa Tenggara? I am sorry, how do you say it in English? The greater Sundanese archipelago.”
   “We are in the lesser Sundanese archipelago,” Dr. Stern corrected him.
   Chief Bononbun frowned and said bitterly,“Ah yes. Lesser.”
   Lewis said,“I do not know enough about tribal dancing styles in this part of the world to be able to judge if your dancers are the greatest in the two Sundanese archipelagos, but since you are such a fan of dance, if you ever visit New York I will have to bring you to the New York City Ballet. The New York City Ballet has the greatest dancers in the world.”
   Chief Bononbun’s pride was stung. So, the visitors were not impressed by the dance. Well, Chief Bononbun would not allow himself to be knocked down that easily. He would show the visitors how his village fished. That would impress them!
   “Please,” Chief Bononbun said, “before I show you where you will spend the night, allow me to give you a tour of my village.”
   “Absolutely,” Lewis said, “We would be delighted.”
   Chief Bononbun clapped his hands and walked off. Lewis and the rest followed him, and the tribesmen who had been playing percussive instruments all put their drums and sticks down and followed behind them. They all walked along the beach for some time until they came to a little lagoon. The men put down their drums, picked up wooden spears that were gathered in a pile there, and waded out into the shallow water.
   Once they were in position, the men all thrust their spears into the water repeatedly, making the sea froth and causing the sediment at their feet to rise and cloud the water around them. Chief Bononbun, beaming proudly, waved his arms out to sea, and said,“Will you just look at my fishermen! They fish based on the ancient principle of Kastom. Observe their strength. No other fishermen in the entire world have the strength of my Keo fishermen!”
   Lewis and the rest watched the spear fishers. None of them seemed to be having much luck. The thrusts of their spears almost always resulted in misses, and only a few of the spear fishers had caught anything at all.
   A little bored, Lewis glanced off to the side and saw, separate from the spear fishers, a man who held a giant leaf by its stem. The leaf was about six feet in length, and four feet in width and the man kept it semi-submerged in the water. The man was completely still, and was staring at the leaf intently. Lewis asked,“What is that man doing?”
   Chief Bononbun said,“Oh that is only Kanoonoo. He is our desa konyol. What you would call the village idiot.”
   Lewis said,“But what is he doing?”
   Chief Bononbun said,“It does not matter what he is doing. What matters is the strength of my fishermen.”
   Lewis said,“It looks like he is holding some kind of leaf.”
   Chief Bononbun sighed. Clearly this man’s interest in Kanoonoo would not be satisfied without an explanation. He said, “Kanoonoo is extremely lazy, so while the other men are fishing, he stands off to the side like that holding his leaf.”
   Lewis said,“Ah. I see.”
   Chief Bononbun then called for the men in the water to return to shore. As the spear fishers turned and began to walk back, Kanoonoo took his leaf’s two wide ends, folded them together along with the long ends into a sack, slung the sack over his shoulder, and walked towards shore with it.
   The few fishermen who had caught anything at all dropped their one or two fish into a small pile on the sand. Chief Bononbun looked the fish over, nodding his head and smiling with pride. He said to Lewis,“Now, are my men the greatest fishermen in the world, or are they not?”
   Lewis said,“I’m impressed that they were able to catch anything at all the way they were going about it.”
   Chief Bononbun beamed with pride at what he took as a compliment from the white man.
   When Kanoonoo came to shore he walked a bit of a ways off from the others, dropped his giant leaf onto the sand, and let it fall open. Lewis looked over and saw that on the leaf there were dozens of flopping fish.
   Chief Bononbun pointed at Kanoonoo and said,“Let’s all laugh at lazy Kanoonoo. While you were all working hard fishing based on the ancient principle of Kastom, he was standing in the water with the stem of a leaf in his hand like an idiot!”
   The tribesmen all pointed at Kanoonoo and laughed at him. Kanoonoo just stood there with a big grin on his face.
   Dr. Stern said,“But Kanoonoo has caught more fish than all your spear fishers put together.”
   The chief said,“But Kanoonoo is lazy. While my fishermen were spear fishing, he was just standing there doing nothing.”
   Dr. Stern said,“But he got better results with less work.”
   “Exactly. Kanoonoo did less work. That means he is lazy.”
   Dr. Stern said,“No, it doesn’t. It’s called efficiency.”
   The chief exclaimed,“A fish agency? Maybe that’s how you do things where you are from, but we Keo people do not need to go to a fish agency to get fish. We catch our fish with our own hands!”
   Dr. Stern frowned and said,“I am not sure I catch the meaning of what you are saying.”
   Lewis said,“Dr. Stern didn’t say ‘a fish agency.’ He said ‘efficiency.’ Efficiency is prized in New York as well as London. In New York, we want our workers to be as efficient as possible, and in order to encourage this we reward them based on their results, not the amount of work they put into things.”
   Chief Bononbun did not understand everything that Lewis had said. He did not know what the words“efficiency” and “efficient” meant, and there were other words with meanings he was unsure of as well. But Bononbun did understand that his plan to impress the visitors had once again met with failure.
   He wracked his brain trying to think of something he could show the visitors that would impress them, and finally he smiled as he hit on just the thing.“Now come,” Chief Bononbun said, “I want to show you how my Keo people gather coconuts based on the ancient principle of Kastom.”
   The Chief walked off and Lewis and the rest followed, followed by the tribesmen, who left their spears on the beach. As they walked to the coconut grove, Chief Bononbun boasted to Lewis about how the people of the Keo tribe were the greatest coconut collectors in the entire world due to their superior strength and commitment to Kastom.
   When they reached the coconut grove, each tribesman went to his own coconut tree where he wrapped his arms and legs around the trunk and climbed by inching his way up with his arms and legs, like an inchworm. When he reached the top of the tree, the tribesman picked a single coconut, climbed down the tree by inching his way downward like an inchworm, placed the coconut on the ground, climbed back up in the same manner as before, picked another coconut, and climbed down the tree again with it. Chief Bononbun, who was smiling proudly, said to Lewis,“Now do you see that the Keo people are the greatest coconut collectors in the world?”
   Lewis said,“They certainly can climb, but it looks like exhausting work to pick coconuts that way.”
   Chief Bononbun grinned ear to ear and said,“I am glad you recognize that my men are mighty climbers. Perhaps they might be the mightiest in the world?”
   Then, Lewis happened to glance over at Kanoonoo. While the other tribesmen were climbing their trees, Kanoonoo was sitting quietly on the ground, ripping the leaves and smaller branches off of a long branch that he had cut from a tree. Lewis asked,“What is he doing?”
   The chief answered,“I told you. Kanoonoo is lazy. While the rest of the Keo climb in order to collect coconuts, he just sits there like an idiot.”
   The tribesmen began to tire from climbing and gradually one by one had to cease their activity. The last one returned from his tree with his final coconut and they all began to gather their coconuts into one pile when Kanoonoo stood up with the stick he had been working on. He had made the stick so that it hooked at one end. Reaching the stick high above him, he used it to quickly cut all the ripe coconuts in his tree by their stems, sending them falling to the ground.
   Lewis commented,“Would you look at that!”
   The chief said,“Ah yes. Lazy Kanoonoo the village idiot again. Everybody point and laugh at Kanoonoo.”
   The other tribesmen pointed fingers at Kanoonoo and laughed. Kanoonoo just continued to cut coconuts from his tree with a big grin on his face.
   Dr. Stern said,“But Kanoonoo isn’t being lazy. He is being efficient.”
   The chief said,“How is he not being lazy? While everybody else was busy climbing trees, he was just sitting there like an idiot carving a tree branch.”
   Dr. Stern said,“But after only a few moments of work, he has collected more coconuts than all the other tribesmen put together.”
   “Exactly. He did only a few moments of work. That makes him lazy.”
   “It doesn’t make him lazy,” Dr. Stern said. “All it means is that he has discovered a different way of doing things.”
   “Ah,” said the chief. “Now you have gotten to the root of the problem. While my Keo people dance and fish and pick coconuts based on the ancient principle of Kastom, Kanoonoo is breaking with Kastom by doing something different. This is very dangerous. The Keo people have been living by the principle of Kastom since the beginning of time, and anybody who breaks with Kastom must be made a pariah.”
   Dr. Stern furrowed his brow and said,“No you haven’t.”
   Chief Bononbun frowned and said,“Haven’t what?”
   Dr. Stern said,“The Keo people haven’t been living based of the principle of Kastom since the beginning of time. Your ancestors were actually civilized, as was all of Indonesia. Then in the 19th century there was a back to nature movement in Indonesia, and many people decided to move back into the jungle in order to live primitive, technology-free lives. Even the word Kastom is just a corruption of the English word custom as it sounds when spoken with an Australian accent. Your ancestors invented your rituals, the dance you showed us, your manner of fishing and picking coconuts, and your entire way of life out of whole cloth in the 19th century, and then told their offspring that they had been living as you do now since the beginning of time in order to create the appearance of unbroken tradition.”
   Chief Bononbun could only shake his head and smile to himself. He had been overly eager to impress these white people because he had thought them to be so sophisticated, but it turns out that white people are as stupid as Kanoonoo, the desa konyol, village idiot. He said,“Come with me. The one called Linda left something for you when she was here.”
   Lewis exclaimed,“You should have told me immediately. You must show me what she left for me right away!”
   Chief Bononbun turned and walked, and the rest followed.
   Chapter 9
   Linda groaned and her heavy eyelids slowly opened and blinked in the purple glow of the phosphorescent slugs that lit the little cavern. She looked at Martin and Amber, who wore nothing but their pith helmets and boots, and groggily asked,“Where are your clothes?”
   “The ebu gogo took them,” Amber said.
   Linda said,“I don’t want to know.”
   Amber said,“The ebu gogo took yours too.”
   Linda looked down and realized that she was completely naked except for her pith helmet and boots. She looked over at the brunette Christa, who was blinking her eyes as she slowly awakened. Christa was identically clad as Linda and Amber. Linda said,“Why did the ebu gogo take our clothes?”
   Amber said,“They… they wanted to inspect us. To see if we were male or female, I think. So they removed our clothes. And then they took them.”
   As Linda came back to her senses she remembered how the ebu gogo had removed Bethany’s clothes and inspected her. She asked, “Where are we?”
   Amber said,“In a cave where they live.”
   Linda said,“Why don’t we leave?”
   Amber said,“We’re being guarded.”
   Linda stuck her head out of the aperture of the cavern they were in. A voice spoke in a quick, high pitched staccato and the shaft of a spear came down and whapped Linda over her pith helmet. She shouted,“Ouch,” and pulled her head back inside the cavern. She removed her helmet, rubbed her head, and said, “That smarted.”
   A few moments went by and then the leader entered with a retinue of ebu gogo. She walked up to Martin, and with a haughty smile and tilt of her head she put her little hands on her little orange furry hips, thrust her pelvis out at him several times, and grinning from ear to ear, said in the mocking tone of a dominatrix,“Tooh kear mi coo-coo?”
   Sweat formed on Martin’s brow. His face grew white, and his eyes bulged as he tried to shake his head no, but unable to, stood where he was paralyzed with indecision.
   The ebu gogo chief thrust her pelvis at Martin three more times and said in the same mocking tone,“Ya, tooh kear mi coo-coo!”
   Martin’s head swam. The ebu gogo leader was about three and a half feet tall. She was covered in orange fur, and had a subhuman face. She didn’t even have a chin. But yet, there was something about her that was irresistibly alluring. Perhaps it was her large breasts that hung so low that her nipples were just inches above her feet, or perhaps it was her round womanly hips. No, Martin thought. There was no use in him kidding himself. It was her fur he found attractive, her fur and nothing else.
   Martin took a step towards the humanoid animal, which continued to thrust its pelvis at him. His dick grew erect and pointed almost straight up.
   The blonde, redhead, and brunette human women all shouted,“Martin! What the fuck are you doing?”
   But Martin was so transfixed by the orange fur of the ebu gogo that he didn’t even hear the human women shouting at him to stop. He did, however, hear the ebu gogo when she thrust out her pelvis and said with cruel mockery in her voice, “Tooh kear mi coo-coo! Tooh yamma mi coo-coo!”
   Martin took another step towards the ebu gogo. The three human women continued to shout at him to stop. Linda lunged forward to physically stop Martin, but she was held back by the sharp spears of the ebu gogo. The three women watched on in horror and disgust as Martin lowered the ebu gogo leader to the ground and mounted her.
   After fucking her in the missionary position for some time, Martin rolled over so that the three and a half foot tall ebu gogo was sitting on his dick, and holding her with two hands on either side, he moved her up and down and up and down on his dick with a rhythmic motion as her low hanging breasts flopped all over his chest until he came inside of her.
   Once Martin was done, he opened his eyes and looked at the ebu gogo’s face. He did not feel the sense of self-disgust, confusion, or shame that he had felt the first time. He had abandoned himself to his feelings. He had abandoned himself to the ebu gogo and her orange fur.
   The ebu gogo got up off Martin’s dick. She reached out a hand, and Martin took it and lifted himself to his feet. He towered over her, just as he towered over all the other ebu gogo in the room. She tugged his hand. Amber said, “Martin, don’t go with it. If you go with it now, there will be no turning back.”
   The ebu gogo gave Martin’s hand another tug. Martin gave one last look at the naked human women in the cavern, and then turned and left the cavern with the ebu gogo leader. The rest of the ebu gogo followed, and several remained outside the aperture that led into the little cavern in order to guard the three human women.
   Linda said,“What the fuck just happened?”
   Amber said,“I’m sure you’ve noticed that they are all female, right? I think something must have happened to their males. They must have been looking for a male, and now they have found one.”
   The brunette Christa said,“They… they killed Bethany when they realized she was not a man.”
   The redhead Amber said,“They… they killed Bethany?” Then she burst into sobs.
   Christa asked,“Do you think they’ll kill us too?”
   The blonde, more mature Linda said,“Don’t think like that. We’ll get out of this, somehow.”
   Chapter 10
   Chief Bononbun led Lewis and the rest through the quiet village. Everywhere they looked, they saw nearly naked natives going in and out of little grass huts that sat on little plots of land as they went about their daily routines. Then, in the center of the village, separated from the little grass huts by a plot of land that was larger than the others, was the largest hut in the village. Chief Bononbun grinned widely and said with pride in his voice,“Welcome to my house.”
   “It is very nice,” Lewis answered impatiently, “But would you please show me what Linda left for me!”
   “Of course,” said Chief Bononbun, pleased that Lewis had called his house nice. “Right this way.”
   Bononbun entered and held the beaded curtain of the doorway open for his guests. Inside the one room hut was a bed of grass, and a small desk and chair. Bononbun motioned towards the desk and said,“This is where, as Chief, I perform the island’s administrative duties.”
   “Yes,” Lewis said. “But please show me what Linda left for me.”
   “It’s right over here,” Bononbun said as he went to his desk, opened a drawer, removed a piece of paper that was inside, and handed it to Lewis.
   Lewis looked at the paper eagerly. On it was a handwritten note in what he knew was Linda’s handwriting. The note read, “Dear Lewis: Ha. Ha. Ha. Ha. I got to Flores before you did, and now I am going to discover the ebu gogo before you do and there is nothing you can do about it. You are a loser and you suck. Ha. Ha. Ha. Ha." The note was signed, “Your ex-wife, Linda.”
   Lewis said,“When did she leave this note?”
   Chief Bononbun said,“A little over a month ago.”
   Lewis said,“And has she returned from the jungle?”
   “No.”
   Lewis said,“She must have found something in there. I know it. Maybe she’s studying the ebu gogo right now, and collecting all sorts of evidence!” Then, he crumpled the paper in his large hands and threw it to the ground with a roar.
   Dr. Stern picked up the paper, un-crumpled it, read it over, and looked up.“This is a lot of competition over a couple of photographs.”
   Clare said,“Dr. Stern, how can you be so naive?”
   Lewis added,“I am not here to photograph an ebu gogo.”
   Dr. Stern raised an eyebrow.“No?”
   Clare said,“No. Nobody trusts photographs anymore.”
   Lewis puffed out his chest boastfully and said,“I plan on returning to New York City with a living specimen.”
   Dr. Stern said,“I would object to your plan on ethical grounds, but since there is no such thing as ebu gogo there would be no point.”
   Chief Bononbun said,“Oh, the ebu gogo are very much real. They used to come into our village and eat our crops, but we Keo people were very clever. The ebu gogo did not wear clothes, so eight generations ago we gave them clothes as a gift. The ebu gogo were very excited to receive clothes and eagerly put them on. But, the clothes we gave them were made of a flammable material. That evening, we went to the cave where the ebu gogo lived and set them all on fire. Many ebu gogo died, but the survivors went deeper into the jungle, where they still live to this day in underground caves. Now, no Keo person will go tothe part of the jungle where the ebu gogo live, because they haven’t forgotten what we did to them eight generations ago, and will take out their vengeance on anybody who wanders into that part of the jungle.”
   Lewis stuck a finger in the air and exclaimed,“Ah-ha! Ladies and gentlemen, I have discovered the ebu gogo!”
   Dr. Stern furrowed his brow and said,“No you have not.”
   Lewis said,“Didn’t you just hear this man? He said they exist. Since he lives here he would know, so it must be true.”
   Dr. Stern said,“The Irish tell stories of Leprechauns. You don’t believe in Leprechauns, do you?”
   Lewis said,“When learning about a foreign place, the first step is to listen to the people who live there. The next step is to look for yourself.”
   “Well,” Dr. Stern observed, “It would seem you are skipping the look for yourself step.”
   Lewis said,“Do you know what, Dr. Stern? For once, I agree with you. Come on team.”
   Dr. Stern said,“We are leaving now? It is going to get dark soon. We were supposed to sleep and wait until morning.”
   Lewis said,“Since Linda has already gotten such a head start, we have no time to waste. Everybody grab your backpacks and let’s go. Come on now. Don’t dawdle.”
   Lewis put on his backpack and left the hut. Shrugging their shoulders, everybody else put on their packs and followed him.
   Lewis walked through the village, past the cultivated fields, and right up to the solid-looking wall of jungle as everybody else followed. He pulled out his machete. With a few swings of his muscular arms he cut away the foliage in front of him, and stepped through the opening he had created. The rest followed, and they entered another world.
   It was a green, alien world out of some bizarre dream. The heavy mist that clung to the ground gave every object a mysterious pallor, and the light from the sun, which only broke through the canopy of leaves overhead with a beam here and there, instead of illuminating as light normally does, hit the mist at such an angle that it added to the opaqueness of the jungle floor, instead of detracting from it.
   As Lewis led the others through the dense jungle, chopping away brush with his machete, everybody grew exhausted. Everybody except for Lewis and Clare, that is. Both were in excellent shape. Lewis was tall, muscular, and powerfully built. Clare had always been very athletic. For them, trekking through the jungle was invigorating. For them, it was a reason to be alive.
   The jungle around them teemed with life, and the cacophony of chirps, whistles, clicks, growls, howls, and roars was a constant presence. All seven wore nearly identical uniforms of black boots, khaki pants, beige shirts and jackets, and off-white pith helmets. Other than Lewis and Clare however, none of them even came close to looking like they belonged in the jungle. They sweated in the moist heat and struggled to keep pace with Lewis and Clare.
   The short fat intern was having the most difficult time of it. He breathed heavily as he walked, constantly wiped the sweat from his brow, and looked like he was going to sit down and refuse to go an inch further at any moment. He breathed a sigh of relief when Lewis lifted his hand in the air and told everybody to halt.
   Lewis stared at the ground at his feet with a look of deep concentration on his face. There was something so focused about his stare that it commanded the complete attention of everybody present. The interns were in awe of the contemplative look on Lewis Dare’s face, and they inspected his face closely, looking for clues as to what was going on in that famous brain of his. Even Dr. Stern, as cynical and world weary as he was, had no choice but to feel respect for Lewis at that moment.
   Everyone watched in silence as Lewis knelt to the ground and inspected something. Lewis motioned for Dr. Stern to join him, and Dr. Stern complied, getting down on both knees. Lewis pointed to a pair of bipedal tracks.“What do you make of that?”
   Dr. Stern barely glanced at the tracks before speaking.“Some sort of primate tracks. Could be orangutan.”
   Lewis said,“I brought you here at great expense, as you are so fond of reminding me, and that is the best you can do? Could be orangutan? Look at the way the tracks go straight through the jungle. Orangutans spend most of their time in trees, and only spend a few minutes at a time on the jungle floor. And orangutans tend to drag their fists when they walk, so you would see fist marks too. And the foot is narrower than an orangutan’s.”
   Dr. Stern gave the tracks another brief, dismissive glance and said,“OK. OK. Fine. They’re not orangutan.”
   Lewis asked the interns to get out the plaster of Paris and mixed it with water from his canteen. He poured the plaster onto the ground until it filled one of the little footprints. Then, everybody waited for the plaster to set.
   Forty-five minutes later, Lewis lifted the cast he had made from the ground, rinsed it with water from his canteen, held it up for everybody to see, and said,“Ladies and gentlemen, I have discovered the ebu gogo.”
   Dr. Stern said,“No you have not. Making a cast of an animal print isn’t the same thing as discovering a new species.”
   Lewis shouted,“I brought you here to verify my findings, not argue with me. Are you telling me that you are unwilling to do the job I am paying you to do?”
   Dr. Stern stuck his nose in the air and said,“I would be perfectly willing to verify your findings, once you have made them. What you have in your hand isn’t even evidence, let alone proof that there is such a thing as ebu gogo. In order for the cast to rise to the level of evidence that an unknown speciesexists, we would at the least have to compare it to other casts in order to determine that it isn’t of an already known species. Do you have a guidebook of Indonesian animal tracks handy?”
   “No.”
   “Then we will have to wait until we return to civilization in order to study the cast.”
   “Well, perhaps you are right and the cast isn’t proof or evidence or whatever, but it is certainly a clue. Let’s follow it.”
   Lewis went off following the tracks. The spell cast moments earlier by his intense concentration was broken, and the three interns all moaned and groaned as they reluctantly followed Lewis deeper into the jungle.
   Dr. Stern stood where he was for a moment and rolled his eyes, a gesture which was not missed by Clare, who looked at him and shook her head.“Well Dr. Stern,” she said, “what did you think we’d be doing? I mean, we are looking for an animal, so we follow animal tracks. That makes sense, right?”
   Dr. Stern said,“It just makes me sad sometimes when I see how stupid most people are,” and walked following the rest, staying at the rear, while Clare caught up with her father.
   As they walked the sun began to set. Expecting Lewis to stop at any moment in order to make camp, the interns and Dr. Stern said nothing in protest, and soon everybody had to make their way through the jungle in the inky blackness of a tropical night. The sounds of daytime jungle life were replaced by the unintentional rustling noises of the kinds of animals that operate secretively, under the cover of darkness.
   The sound of a twig snapping under her foot startled the petite Asian intern, who jumped and grabbed the short fat intern’s arm, which startled him and made him jump. She whispered “Sorry, I didn’t mean to scare you.”
   The short fat intern breathed heavily a couple of times, and then stuck out his chest and said,“Scare me? You didn’t scare me. Nothing scares me. It’s just that I can’t see a thing in this awful darkness.”
   Then he went to the front where Lewis was cutting away with his machete and said,“Mr. Dare, I think it’s time we break out the torches.”
   Lewis turned to his daughter and said,“Clare, would you tell this intern that we are searching for an elusive cryptid, and that if we do too much to make our presence known, we might scare it away.”
   Clare was about to comply when Dr. Stern said,“I agree with the intern. I can hardly see where I am going.”
   The short fat intern said,“I have a name, you know.”
   Lewis let out an annoyed grunt and said,“Fine, we can all carry torches, but I don’t want any more complaining. Bunch of babies.”
   Lewis took off his pack, removed a torch, and lit it. The moment he did, bizarre screeches came from everywhere around them, as well as rustling in the trees. The Asian intern grabbed the fat intern’s arm and held tight, the tall skinny intern looked around in fright, and even Lewis looked a little worried.
   Recovering quickly in order to avoid the others seeing him display weakness Lewis said,“Well, we have been hiking a long time now. I think it’s time to set up camp.”
   The interns dropped their packs with relief. The fat intern whispered to the others,“Let’s get our tents up as quickly as we can so he can’t change his mind and make us go again.” All hurried to set up their tents as quickly as they could.
   That night as everybody lay alone, fast asleep in their tents, the front flap of the Asian intern’s tent zipped opened and the fat intern poked his head in. The Asian intern sat up startled, and then when she saw who it was smiled.
   The fat intern said,“Psst. Come to my tent. I want to show you something.”
   The Asian intern got up and followed the fat intern to his tent. Inside the fat intern’s tent, he opened his pack and said, “Look at this!”
   The Asian intern’s mouth opened in shock. She said, “Are those… are those firecrackers?”
   The fat intern said,“Yeah. I want to set them off sometime when nobody else is around.”
   The Asian intern said,“If Mr. Dare caught you, you’d be in huge trouble.”
   The fat intern frowned and said,“I thought you’d be impressed.”
   The Asian intern smiled and said,“I am impressed. I like a man who isn’t afraid of a little danger.”
   Then fat intern said,“Want to see something else that’s cool?”
   The Asian intern said,“OK.”
   So, the fat intern unzipped his pants and pulled out his dick.
   Chapter 11
   In a cavern that was a part of the twisting network of caves that ran beneath the island of Flores, Martin lay naked on a bed of leaves next to the ebu gogo leader, whose name he now knew to be Lua. They had just made love, and both were exhausted. Martin ran his hand through the hair on the ebu gogo’s head and said, “Meh yamma tooh, Lua.”
   The ebu gogo smiled and said,“Tooh yamma mi coo-coo.”
   “Ne. Meh yamma tooh.”
   Lua gave him a very serious look and said,“Meh sta ahada.”
   Over the last week Martin had gotten very good at speaking and understanding the ebu gogo language. It was a simple language, and easy to learn. But, he had never before heard the word“Ahada.” So, he told the ebu gogo lying at his side that he didn’t know what the word meant.
   With both hands she took his wrist and lifted his gigantic hand that was combing its fingers through her hair from her head, and placed it on her little belly. At first Martin thought Lua wanted him to rub and caress the soft fur on her belly, as he often did. So, he let his hand sink into her fur and let it curl around his fingers. A content smile came to his face as the fur worked its familiar magic on his fingers and hand, but then the smile on his face dropped when his hand felt a bulge in Lua’s belly that hadn’t been there before. He pressed his hand down on her belly. It was hard, where previously it had been soft. The smile lines around his eyes disappeared as they widened in disbelief. Then, his disbelief turned to horror. He removed his now shaking hand, stared at her belly, and said, “Ahada?”
   The ebu gogo smiled up at him and said dreamily,“Ya. Ahada.”
   Martin leapt to his feet, but he immediately became lightheaded and had to lean against the rock wall of the cavern for support. He hyperventilated and grew dizzy as the room spun around him. Then, forgetting to speak the ebu gogo language, he muttered in English,“Oh my God. I have to go take a walk in the jungle,” and ran out of the room, leaving Lua alone where she was.
   Martin walked through the jungle, lost in thought, wearing nothing but the boots and pith helmet which he always wore. It had been a long time since he had missed his clothes, but he suddenly felt exposed and longed for something to cover himself up with. It was as if the trees were staring at him, along with all of the insects, birds, and animals as well.
   Was it really possible that he had gotten Lua pregnant? She was an ebu gogo, and he was a human being. Wasn’t it more likely that she had gotten pregnant by a male ebu gogo? But where were the male ebu gogo? He had never seen one, and all of his questions regarding them had gone unanswered, until finally he had given up asking about them, and accepted that he was the only male that the ebu gogo knew, and that he belonged to Lua, the ebu gogo leader.
   But of course there had to be males. Was it realistic that all of these females existed, but there were no males? Where had the females come from, without males? But then again, even if there were ebu gogo males somewhere, he had been constantly by Lua’s side all this time. When would she have had the time to sneak away to get impregnated by a male ebu gogo?
   OK then, so the child was his. But how was it possible? He thought back to what he knew about early human evolution. Our human ancestors interbred with other species in the genus of Homo all the time, and produced hybrid offspring as a result of this interbreeding. Early modern humans interbred with the Neanderthal in Europe, and with Denisovan man in Asia. In fact, the average European’s DNA is three percent Neanderthal from interbreeding, and the average Asian has five percent Denisovan man DNA.
   These ebu gogo, they were a close relative to man. That much was certain. They were in the genus of Homo, just as modern man is, and just as all of the extinct species were that early modern man interbred with. Therefore, why wouldn’t it be possible for a man and an ebu gogo to produce offspring together? Hybrid offspring… the thought made Martin sick. But it also made him curious. What would such offspring look like?
   Walking through the wild jungle lost in thought had a calming effect on Martin’s nerves. But now, for the first time in what seemed like a lifetime but was in reality just a week, he had a strong desire to talk to somebody. Not to an ebu gogo, but to a fellow human being.
   But the only human beings he knew of were Amber, Christa, and Linda, and they hated him. Oh why could they not understand that he was a complicated person with complicated needs? They called him all sorts of names, and persecuted him solely on the basis of who he loved. But he had to talk to a human being, and they were the only human beings available. Perhaps he could make them understand.
   Martin went through the entrance to the caves and walked the now-familiar maze of passageways lit by phosphorescent slugs.
   The three women were no longer in the tiny room where they had first been held. They had been moved into a deep round pit within a remote cavern in the network of caves. The pit had bamboo grating covering it so that even if the women could climb to the top, which was doubtful, they still would not have been able to make an exit. But just to be on the safe side, Lua had placed four guards around the mouth of the pit. They held spears with the butts resting on the ground and the tips pointing upwards towards the ceiling of the cavern where many phosphorescent slugs crawled, giving off their dark purple light that enabled sight in this strange land beneath the island of Flores.
   Martin walked up to the pit and told the four guards to leave. They were accustomed to obeying him due to his close relationship with Lua, so they exited the cavern and left him alone with the women. This was unnecessary on Martin’s part, given that the ebu gogo would not have been able to understand what Martin and the women said to each other anyway, but Martin was a little ashamed that he wanted to talk with the furless human females and as a result of his own embarrassment he didn’t want the furry ebu gogo women to be present.
   Martin looked down at the three nude women through the bamboo grating at the top of the pit, sheepishly waved hello, smiled toothlessly, and said,“Hi, Amber. Hi, Christa. Hi, Linda.”
   The three women looked up at him spitefully. The redhead Amber said, with venom in her voice,“Hi, Martin. How’s your girlfriend?”
   Then the brunette Christa shouted,“Traitor to humanity!”
   Martin fumed and stomped his foot a few times on the hard stone floor as he shouted,“Stop making fun of me! Why do you girls always make fun of me? This is serious. I need to talk.”
   The blonde, more mature Linda shouted up,“We have nothing to talk about, Martin. Now leave.”
   Martin shouted down,“You know that I am the only reason you have been kept alive, right? It’s because I told the ebu gogo not to kill you. And this is the gratitude I get? Perhaps I should stop protecting you. Then you’ll wish you had been more grateful.”
   Amber, Christa, and Linda all shouted at once things like,“Fuck off,” “Get out of here,” Leave us alone,” and “Grateful my ass!”
   When they finished shouting Martin blurted out,“Lua is pregnant!”
   There was a hushed silence as the three women looked at each other and then up at Martin in shock. Finally Linda said,“Surely it can’t be yours.”
   Martin cried,“It is mine. It is. Who else’s could it be? I am with her constantly, I have never seen a male ebu gogo, and… and…” he looked away from the women with shame and his voice dropped to a whisper, “and we are always doing it. Three or four times a day.”
   He straightened his back and suddenly became light-headed as he thought about all of that sex he had been having with the non-human ebu gogo. It hadn’t seemed like something shameful at the time. It was just something he did. He had enjoyed it so much that he hadn’t even considered what the consequences might be. Given that they were different species, he hadn’t even thought that there could be consequences. But now the consequences of his actions showed on Lua’s growing belly. That belly! What shame he felt about that belly! It was a sign to all the world of the dirtiness that he had done, and whenever somebody looked at that belly he or she would know that he, Martin, had sex with an animal. He wanted to leave the three women inthe pit and never see them again. Now that he had told them what had happened, he wanted them to be dead, so that they would no longer know.
   After much silence on the part of Martin and the three naked women in the pit Linda said,“You have to destroy it.”
   Martin shouted back,“No!”
   Linda looked up and tried to make eye contact as she said,“Martin, if that child is born, it will be an abomination. It will be a stain on the human race. It doesn’t matter how you do it, if you abort it, or if you kill Lua, but it has to be done. That child cannot be born.”
   “I couldn’t! To kill my own flesh and blood. It’s unthinkable.”
   Linda said,“Martin, think about the ethics involved. If that child is born, it will be half human, and half ebu gogo. Then, if it goes out and reproduces with other humans, it will spread ebu gogo DNA throughout the human race. Think about what kind of genetic damage that could do to humanity generations down the line. Why should the rest of humanity take that risk just because of your own feelings, feelings which seem to me to be deeply conflicted I might add? You major in genetic anthropology for crying out loud. I know you can see that I am right.”
   “But… but what should I do?”
   “Find a stick, skin the bark from it, sharpen it with a rock, and cut barbs into it near the sharp end but facing away from it. You are going to ram this barbed stick up Lua’s vagina, and impale the fetus with it. The barbs will catch against the fetus’s flesh, and then you will pull it out of her.”
   “But that’s horrible. It’s murder.”
   “No, it’s not murder. It’s an abortion, performed the old fashioned way before modern medicine, just like they used to do in Biblical times.”
   “But it’s my own child we are talking about, my own flesh and blood.”
   “Your child is a monster. By conceiving that child, you have abandoned the human race. Now, in order to rejoin the human race, this is the penance you must perform.”
   Martin left the three women and walked around the jungle alone some more. Of course he wasn’t going to abort his own child. But he wasn’t sure that he wanted to keep the child, either. He was so conflicted! He didn’t know what he wanted. He wished he could just leave the jungle, go back to civilization, and leave this entire mess of a life he had created for himself on Flores behind him.
   But he knew that if he left now, Flores would come calling. He knew that for the rest of his life, as he lay in bed at night before going to sleep, his mind would bring him back here to this moment of decision, and that he would question the choices that led him to flee.
   He also knew that it is not in the nature of secrets to remain hidden, and that somehow the truth would eventually come out that he had fathered a half human child on a remote Indonesian island. So maybe it was better for him to remain hidden on Flores along with his secret.
   He had heard the three women, and listened to what they had to say. Now, he decided, it was time to hear Lua, and listen to what she had to say. So he returned to her cavern, where she still lay where he had left her. She sat up when he entered, and he sat down beside her. He took her hand and said in the language of the ebu gogo,“Lua, what kind of child will it be that we have conceived together?”
   She answered,“It will be the future of the world. It will be tomorrow’s people.”
   “But what does that mean?”
   “It means that you will get to watch your child being born, to raise him, to watch him become a strong, handsome ebu gogo. It means that he will give you grandchildren who will love you and remain by your side until your end, so that when you are old and dying, you will be surrounded by life.”
   “But what does it mean for the rest of humanity?”
   “It means that because we have produced offspring together, just as the parent on his deathbed is surrounded by life, so too will humanity its deathbed be surrounded by life.”
   “I don’t understand. I wish I did, but I don’t.”
   Lua said,“I am going to sing to you now. The words and melody are very old, and their origins lie in the remote past, before there were ebu gogo. I am going to sing of our origins, and our history. I am going to sing to you from The Song of the Ebu Gogo.”
   And then Lua began to sing, and the moment Martin heard the melody he understood that it came from the misty remote past, from before the dawn of man. As he listened to the verses, Martin understood them, even though they were in archaic forms of the language the modern ebu gogo spoke.
   When the song began, the earth was frozen. It was covered in ice and snow. But then some snow melted and in the one thawed out green part of the earth, the apes began to talk. Then, some talking apes left the warmth of the green jungle to travel to a land that was still blanketed with ice.
   Lua sang of the historical figures from pre-humanity. First, she sang about Asha. Asha, who discovered what the ebu gogo call the clever weapon, a weapon that would serve as the catalyst that led to the near obliteration of the ancestors of the ebu gogo.
   And she sang about Seeter, the one who led the ancestors of the ebu gogo across the land and the sea in order to escape the clever weapon, to the island of Flores, where the ebu gogo was born.
   Martin listened, mesmerized by this history composed of verses that had been passed down from generation to generation since before human beings began to walk the earth.
   When Lua’s beautiful singing ended, both sat in silence for some time and then Lua said, “Martin, now do you understand?”
   Martin said,“Yes.”
   Lua said,“Good. Then you will understand why this must happen as well.”
   Lua clapped her hand, and another ebu gogo entered. She was barely over three feet tall, and was covered in orange fur. Like the others, Martin found her very attractive. Her forehead sloped back at a nice angle, she had a very broad nose, even for an ebu gogo, and very fat lips on a chinless mouth. He couldn’t help but stare at her enormous breasts which hung past her round hips, almost to her knees, and at her orange fur. Most of all he loved her fur. Martin asked, “What’s going on?”
   Lua got up off the bed and her breasts hung almost to her feet. She walked to this other ebu gogo, and gently brought her over to Martin. Lua said,“You understand Martin. You understand why you must do this. You must do it for the future, Martin, for the future.”
   And Martin did understand, so he had sex with the other ebu gogo right there in the cavern on Lua’s bed of grass and leaves as Lua watched.
   Chapter 12
   The light of dawn gave off its first orange-pink glow through the jungle mist. Contrasting sharply with the serenity of the scene was Lewis, wide awake and chipper, strolling about the camp with a bounce to his step, shaking tents with his muscular arms.“Up, up,” he shouted, “Come on everybody, we have a big day ahead of us.”
   Tents unzipped, bleary-eyed heads poked out, and stiff bodies stepped out into the Indonesian dawn, yawning and stretching.
   Lewis continued in the same cheery tone,“I have been up for a half an hour, and I’ve already seen twenty species of plants that I didn’t recognize.”
   Dr. Stern yawned, causing the frown lines around his mouth to momentarily deepen.“OK, so what? You didn’t recognize them. Since you don’t do any research or study, how would you expect to?”
   “Just look around you!”
   Dr. Stern glanced at the dense foliage all around them. The plants did all look strange, almost like something out of prehistory, with unusually shaped flowers and gigantic leaves. He blinked a couple of times, refusing to believe his sleepy eyes.“I’m sorry. I’m just no good without my morning dose of caffeine.”
   Lewis handed Dr. Stern some bright red berries.“Chew on these.”
   Dr. Stern looked the berries over, studying them carefully. Unable to recognize the species they belonged to he asked,“What are they?”
   Lewis replied cheerfully,“I don’t know but they are growing all over. They seem to be a close relative of the coffee bean. I’ve been chewing them all morning and I feel great!”
   Dr. Stern’s jaw dropped in shock. He stammered and then said, “You mean to tell me that you have been eating berries from an unidentified plant? I mean, do you have any idea how dangerous that is?”
   “Oh come on Dr. Stern, where’s your sense of adventure? Trust me. I’m a nutritionist. Come on. Put one in your mouth and chew on it.”
   Dr. Stern mulled the berries over with a look of intense worry on his brow, trying to determine just how poisonous they were and how much longer Lewis Dare had to live.
   Clare stepped forward, said,“Oh my God you are such a baby," took some berries from her father’s hand, tossed them into her mouth, chewed them, and swallowed.
   Dr. Stern watched Clare with horror, as if she could keel over and die at any instant.
   Just then a screech came from a great distance in the sky where the orange-pink of dawn met the grayness of vanishing night. Lewis looked up and everybody followed his gaze. In the sky, very far in the distance, a few black dots circled around each other. Lewis turned to the fat intern.“Intern, get me my field glasses.”
   The intern went to a pack and quickly returned with a pair of binoculars. Lewis put them up to his eyes, saw two giant bats soaring around each other, and said,“They must be ahool.”
   Dr. Stern asked,“Ahool?”
   Lewis said,“Ahool. Giant bats with ten foot long wingspans.”
   Dr. Stern rolled his eyes and smirked.“Oh, well that’s reasonable.”
   Lewis, visibly annoyed, shoved the binoculars into Dr. Stern’s hands. “Take a look for yourself.”
   Dr. Stern put the binoculars up to his eyes and looked up while everyone else looked up at the black specks in the orange, pink, and gray sky.
   Looking through the binoculars, Dr. Stern said“Those are just regular bats returning to their cave because the sun is coming up and they are nocturnal. The reason they appeared to you to be giant is… get this… your mind is going to be blown… because you were looking at them through binoculars and binoculars make everything appear to begiant.”
   Lewis shouted,“That’s ridiculous. This is the last time I hire a PhD to verify my findings. You people are so cynical and close-minded that you can’t do your jobs. Imagine paying somebody all this money because they have the required educational background to do something but then their education makes it impossible for them to do it. It’s no wonder college grads can’t get work. Everybody prefers to hire people whose minds haven’t been ruined by fucking universities!”
   Dr. Stern replied stiffly,“I am sorry that my education makes it impossible for me to say ridiculous things that aren’t true like that those bats up there have ten-foot-long wingspans.”
   Lewis grabbed the binoculars back from Dr. Stern and put them to his eyes, but as he did, the specks disappeared into the distance as the sun climbed into view and its orange-pink hues turned to blinding yellow, clearing the mist away and turning the sky a stunning blue.
   Lewis put the binoculars down, turned to the group, and said,“All right, attention everybody! I have located the trail from yesterday. Our plan for this morning is to eat and then...”
   The tall skinny intern, who had been staring past Lewis, suddenly bolted off into the jungle. Lewis called out,“Intern! Hey, intern!" But the intern kept running and disappeared from view. Everybody looked at one another, not knowing what to do. Lewis exclaimed, “Everybody, after him," and everybody took off running.
   They found the intern a few moments later lying face-down in a pool of mud in a rocky clearing. Lewis put his large hands on his hips and shouted“You had better have a very good explanation for this!”
   The intern sat up. Mud dripped from his entire body. He shook the mud from his hands and then used them to wipe the mud from his face and said,“I saw an ebu gogo.”
   Dr. Stern let out a single hollow laugh.“First the ahool, now the ebu gogo! That’s two cryptids discovered in five minutes. This must be a record.”
   Lewis, ignoring Dr. Stern, asked the intern,“What did it look like?”
   “Like a really small person covered in orange fur.”
   “Where did it go?”
   “I don’t know. I dove after it, but I missed and landed in this puddle.”
   Lewis turned to the rest of the group and said,“Quick! Everyone fan out and find it! Come on. Move!”
   But nobody moved. Dr. Stern said,“If you are going to split us up, we should at least all carry walkie-talkies.”
   Lewis cried,“We don’t have time for this,” turned to the fat intern, and said, “Intern, get out the walkie-talkies. Hurry! We are losing valuable time.”
   As the fat intern rummaged through his pack, Lewis watched him impatiently and said,“Hurry up!!! We don’t have all day. Do you want me to pass you, or fail you?”
   The fat intern looked up from his pack and said,“Uh-oh.”
   Lewis gave the intern an impatient, questioning look. When the intern didn’t respond, Lewis asked, “What?”
   The intern looked away sheepishly and said,“I think I left the walkie-talkies on your jet.”
   Lewis was unbothered by this news. He said,“Then we have to be especially careful to remain in groups. Interns, I want you to stick together. Clare will go with me. Jack, you go with Dr. Stern. Search low lying brush, small caves, and anywhere else a really small person covered in orange fur might hide. We will meet back here in forty-five minutes to an hour.”
   Jack skipped up to Dr. Stern and said,“Oh Mr. Stern, I am so happy to be going with you!”
   Dr. Stern said rather stiffly,“It’s Dr. Stern, not Mr.”
   Jack said,“Oh, it’s OK. I like to be informal so I don’t mind calling you Mr.” Then, Jack looked at the ground demurely, looked back up at Dr. Stern smiling shyly, and said, “Can I just say though that although I’m not gay, I think you are very handsome?”
   Then, Jack gave Dr. Stern a big hug.
   Dr. Stern carefully freed himself from Jack’s embrace, turned to Lewis, and said, “Uh, Mr. Dare, why don’t I go with Clare? And then Jack can go with you.”
   Lewis was about to object when Clare smiled, said“Oh, all right," and strolled over to Dr. Stern with her hands clasped behind her back. Jack smiled, skipped up to Lewis, and to Lewis’s dismay, gave him a big hug.
   The tall skinny intern said,“Now, wait a minute. It could be dangerous out there, and our school contract specifically states that you can’t place us in dangerous situations.”
   Lewis let out an annoyed grunt, freed himself from Jack’s embrace, unzipped his pack, and removed three large, unusually shaped rifles. Thinking Lewis had finally lost his mind and was about to shoot them, the interns all cowered with their arms held up to protect their faces. Lewis threw one gun to Dr. Stern, one gun to the interns, and kept one gunfor himself. He turned to the tall skinny intern and said, “Tranquilizer darts. Happy?”
   Chapter 13
   Three weeks had gone by since Martin had come to tell them that Lua was pregnant, and the three women were still at the bottom of the deep round pit with the bamboo grating at the top, guarded by ebu gogo with spears.
   Amber said,“We need to escape from here so we can bring an army back and kill Martin’s little girlfriend before she gives birth.”
   The older and wiser Linda said,“What’s the use? Civilized man will never agree to kill the ebu gogo. They’ll want to protect the ebu gogo, and protect the soon to be born hybrid, from us.”
   Christa said,“So what can we do?”
   Linda said,“Right now Martin identifies with the ebu gogo. He has lost his humanity. We need to give it back to him.”
   The redhead and the brunette both gave the blonde incredulous looks. Amber said,“You don’t mean… you mean we have to seduce Martin?”
   “Yes. We need to show him what it means to be human again, so that we can convince him to destroy the pregnant ebu gogo.”
   Unknown to the three women in the pit, the ebu gogo gestation period was only one month and Lua’s due date had arrived. As the women plotted against Lua, she lay in another cavern on a mattress of grass and leaves on top of a stone slab surrounded by ebu gogo, many of them pregnant as well. Martin had impregnated them all.
   Because the ebu gogo were all between three and four feet in height, there were many positions that Martin could take with them that he couldn’t with a full-sized human woman, but still his favorite position to take an ebu gogo in was the missionary position. He felt very powerful looking down at the little furry women. He also felt very powerful at this moment, looking around at all of the pregnant bellies, and knowing that his seed had created all of them.
   Lua’s enormous breasts hung off both sides of the stone slab all the way to the ground and then went along the stone floor for some ways. Martin looked on as the ebu gogo murmured among themselves in their language, which Martin now spoke fluently.
   The child in Lua’s belly was huge, and she was no longer able to walk on her own due it its enormity. Lua was a three and a half foot tall creature that had been impregnated by an almost six foot tall creature, and the large size of the fetus was too much for her little body to bear.
   There were impressions on her belly where the limbs and appendages of the unborn child inside her pressed against the interior lining of her womb. Where these impressions were, stretch marks had formed, and now beneath her fur, jagged purple lines covering her stomach could be seen where the stretch marks slowly ripped apart at their seams. Martin was very worried about Lua, and was relieved that her due date had come. He did not know how much more her body could take.
   The ebu gogo murmured quietly to each other so that Martin could not hear, and then leaned in and said something to Lua. Then, Lua smiled at Martin and called him over. The ebu gogo parted solemnly in order to let Martin approach her. She took his hand and said, in the language of the ebu gogo,“Goodbye.”
   Martin said,“Goodbye? Why is this goodbye?”
   Lua groaned, smiled weakly, and said,“Because the child inside of me is too big. I will never get to meet him.”
   “Him? How do you know our child is going to be a male? I have never seen an ebu gogo boy or man.”
   “There are male ebu gogo, but no, I wouldn’t call them men. I wouldn’t even call them boys.
   “I have already sung to you from The Song of the Ebu Gogo, so you understand where the ebu gogo came from. But what I didn’t tell you, is that in recent generations the males have turned their backs on The Song of the Ebu Gogo. Instead of worshipping life, as those of us who sing The Song of the Ebu Gogo do, many generations ago, the men started to worship death. They thought that human beings were superior, and that the world would be better off without the ebu gogo. They wanted the last of the ebu gogo to die off, so that we would no longer pose a threat to the humans. So, they decided that they didn’t want to have sex with ebu gogo women anymore, because they didn’t want to create more ebu gogo. They left the caves and went to live apart from us on the surface. Lacking a male presence, we compensated by adopting masculine qualities. We women became warriors, and hunters, and we hunted the men, and forced them to impregnate us.
   But, as a result of their turning their backs on The Song of the Ebu Gogo, each generation has left the men less manly than the last, until the present generation, which is so unmanly that not only do they refuse to do their manly duty and create the next generation of ebu gogo, but even when we attempt to force them, they are unable to have sex with us because their penises have become so small.
   When we first met, you found us warriors instead of lovers. But you have made lovers out of us once again. Although today I must die, I am glad knowing that I die as a woman, and not a warrior. Ack! Ack! This is the end. I can feel it.”
   Then, the purple lined stretch marks on Lua’s stomach reached their breaking point and rips formed all along her swollen, furry belly. Little bloody hands poked through her belly, and then a little bloody head ripped its way through her belly, and Martin saw his little furry son for the first time. Martin looked over at Lua’s face in order to comfort her, and realized that she was dead. A lump formed in his throat and he ran from the room, tears streaming down his cheek.
   Martin ran out into the jungle, and walked alone for some time, lost in thought. Lua had died giving birth to his son. He felt guilty, but he also knew that it was something that Lua had known would happen, and that it was what she had wanted. If only she had given him warning though, so that he could have had time to prepare and to say goodbye. But of course, she wasn’t that thoughtful. Lua lacked the empathy to be able to reason that Martin would want to say goodbye to her, as she had said goodbye to him. After all, she was just an animal.
   Martin suddenly had the desire to speak with a fellow human being. But the only humans in the jungle were the three women in the pit, and they hated his guts. But he was so lonely, and he had things he needed to say that could not be said to an ebu gogo, but could only be said to another human being.
   His heart ached for human company, for someone who would listen and understand. So even though their insults stung him, even though Martin knew that they hated him, he had nowhere else to turn, so he went to see the three women in the hope that they would listen.
   Chapter 14
   Dr. Stern and Clare walked through the jungle in silence. Dr. Stern held the tranquilizer gun Lewis had tossed him on one side, but it was the pretty young woman at his other side that commanded all of his attention. It had been a long time since he had talked to a pretty girl. He always kept himself locked away days and nights at the Museum of Natural History, so he didn’t often get the chance to talk to pretty girls, or anyone else for that matter.
   She was very attractive, and there was something very animated about her. She was full of energy, and of life. Life, for someone such as her, Dr. Stern knew, was a constant adventure. Life had been a constant adventure for him too, once.
   When he was a young man, Dr. Stern had believed that science was destined to become the art form of the twenty-first century. This was just before the turn of the century, and he was still very optimistic about what the future would bring. So he wrote scientific papers that reflected his notion of science as an art. They were wild and strange papers, meant not to prove their point, but to provoke, and to make a statement. Dr. Stern made many statements in his papers during those days, statements about the human condition, and mankind’s place in the order of the universe. His papers were satires that ridiculed mankind and tore to shreds mankind’s feelings of dominance among the animal species. They were papers that were designed to make the reader feel uncomfortable. They were subversive works.
   But then one day, one of his papers,“The Descendants of Pongo Abelii,” landed him in trouble. The truth was that the uproar had nothing to do with the content of the paper. The powers that be had started to notice Dr. Stern, and decided that he needed to be stopped, and they used the paper as a convenient excuse. But Dr. Stern didn’t know this, and blamed his paper, and blamed himself for writing it. From that moment on, Dr. Stern became one of the fiercest defenders of a power that he had initially set out to oppose.
   But at any rate, he really wanted to talk to the girl next to him and since he couldn’t think of anything else to say, in order to break the ice he rather stupidly asked, “Just out of scientific curiosity, what is a furry?”
   Clare turned to him, shocked.“Why on earth would you ask such a thing?”
   Dr. Stern had not expected such an intense reaction from Clare. He stammered a few times and said defensively,“Well, I heard you say that Jack is a furry, and the guy is so weird that I was just wondering.”
   Clare looked at the man by her side. He seemed harmless enough. Most men she met wanted something from her, and after investing an incredibly modest amount of time and energy on her, expected to get it. And if she didn’t want to give it, they got real aggressive real fast.
   But she did like to have a man around to talk to, if for no other reason than to vent. So she often found herself looking for what she called a harmless man, a man who wouldn’t be pushy and wouldn’t get aggressive when he didn’t get what he was there for.
   She said,“A furry is a kind of sexual orientation where the man or woman, well OK, they’re all men, is attracted to anthropomorphized drawings of animals. It’s kind of a role playing game too, where they live their lives vicariously through furry artwork. They’re perverts, basically. They spend all their time trading yiff.”
   Dr. Stern was shocked. He came from a culture where what happened behind closed doors stayed there. But, Clare had also aroused a morbid curiosity in him, so against his better judgment he said,“Yiff?”
   “Yiff is furry pornography. Yiff is also their word for ‘Hello,’ and their word for ‘Sex,’ and their word for ‘Do you want to have sex?’ That should give you an idea of their disgusting, depraved, and degenerate culture.”
   Dr. Stern was again shocked, but once again curiosity got the better of him, so he asked,“They have their own language?”
   Clare sighed and looked off wistfully into the canopy of dense foliage that blocked out the sky.“I first met Jack a few years ago online. You see, I was posting pictures of myself on this infamous, anonymous imageboard, you know, just for a reaction, although the reaction was usually ‘tits or GTFO.’
   “So anyway, this guy says he likes my pictures. We trade information and start chatting. You know how it is, after awhile it’s kind of like we got to know each other, so I invited him on one of my father’s expeditions, to Lake Champlain.”
   “And then you realized he was a freak.”
   “Oh no, I was fascinated by him.”
   “Why?”
   “I guess it’s because I could never tell whether he was joking or being serious.”
   “Neither. He’s psychotic.”
   “Well, I know that now. Give me a break. I was just a kid. Anyway, all during Lake Champlain, we didn’t hook up. But it wasn’t weird, you know? After Lake Champlain I went to stay with him at his mom’s house in New Jersey, and one night we were drinking champagne of all things and Jack leaned in and kissed me on the mouth. I leaned back and let him. He climbed on top of me and what followed was a lot of heavy petting, don’t mind the pun, and soon we were both undressed. But then…”
   Deep within the state of New Jersey there was a house, and beneath this house was an unfinished basement. In one corner of the basement there was a cluttered desk where sat a high-end gaming computer. There was dirty laundry scattered about the floor, and a big pile of it in another corner. And in yet another corner of the basement a queen sized mattress lay on the floor. On top of the queen sized mattress lay Clare Dare, and on top of Clare Dare lay Jack Holland. His mouth was locked to hers and he moved his hands all over her body, feeling its softness through her clothes.
   She lifted her arms above her head and he removed her shirt. He fondled her breasts above her bra. She whispered,“You can take it off,” and he fumbled with the strap a bit before undoing the clasp and revealing two budding breasts, as pure and white as fresh snow. He removed his shirt and threw it aside, leaned in, and locked his mouth with hers again, and made out with her as he fondled her breasts with his hand.
   He lifted himself off of her a bit, unzipped her jeans, and pulled her jeans and panties down to her ankles with a single movement. She kicked her feet in order to remove her jeans and panties completely. Still on top of her but lifted slightly on his arms and knees, he removed his own jeans and boxer shorts.
   She looked up at him waiting expectantly for him to enter that region of hers that had only been entered a few times before, that wasn’t even yet covered with a full bushel of hair but had only sprouted a few blondish wisps.
   But instead of entering her, Jack got up off of Clare and disappeared around a corner. Clare remained on her back confused, but then when she heard him rummaging around in the closet she said,“If you’re looking for a condom don’t bother. I hate those things.”
   Jack returned however not with a condom, but dressed in a furry fox costume. A fursuit. His entire head was covered by a furry mask, his hands were covered by furry gloves that were designed to look like paws, and his feet too were covered to look like paws. His entire body was covered by the fursuit, except for one open flap in the back, exposing his bare butt, and one in the front, exposing his hard cock.
   Clare sat up shocked and yelled,“Jack! What the fuck?”
   Jack sat down next to her and said,“My name is not Jack. My name is Foxie McFoxtrot.”
   Jack held in his arms a similar fursuit to the one he wore, but this one was a white rabbit. He held it out to Clare and said,“Put this on, and then you can be my little bunny. Do you want to be a bunny? Do you want to be my wittle bunny wabbit?”
   Clare looked at the fursuit in Jack’s hands and suddenly her face turned red and she started to cry. With tears streaming down her cheeks she said, “Why are you doing this?”
   Jack said,“Come on. Put the fursuit on so you can be my wittle bunny wabbit.”
   Clare just sat there crying and said,“Oh my God you’re a fucking furry.”
   Jack whimpered like a puppy and said,“Put on the wittle wabbit fursuit. Pwease?”
   Clare was completely repulsed. She grabbed for her clothes, but Jack pushed her back down onto the mattress and pinned her there with his elbows and knees. More forcefully now he said“Put it on!”
   Then, when Clare didn’t respond, Jack tried to wrestle her into the fursuit.
   Overpowered, Clare called out,“Help! Mrs. Holland? Help! Help!”
   The door upstairs opened. Jack covered Clare’s face with a pillow so she couldn’t talk. A woman’s voice called down, “Is everything all right down there?”
   Jack called back,“Yes mom, we’re just larping.”
   Clare got her head out from beneath the pillow and called back up the stairs,“No Mrs. Holland. We are not larping. Jack is trying to rape me!”
   Jack said,“No. We are just pretending that I am trying to rape her. It’s a game. She’s just playing.”
   Clare yelled,“No. It is not a game. I am really being raped.”
   Jack got the pillow back over Clare’s face so she couldn’t talk and then called up the stairs, “She’s just acting mom. Isn’t she convincing? Clare wants to be a movie star, you know.”
   From upstairs Mrs. Holland chuckled and said,“Oh you kids and your role playing. All right dear, I’ll leave you two alone so you can do your cosplay.”
   The door upstairs shut. Jack removed the pillow from the squirming Clare’s face. She gasped for air. Jack said, “Clare, you’re doing it wrong. You aren’t supposed to fight with me. Yiffing is supposed to be playful.”
   Clare said,“Fuck you.”
   Jack said,“Shame on you Clare, for using such a vulgar word.”
   Again Clare said,“Fuck you.”
   Jack said, with exasperation in his voice,“Clare, you still don’t get it. Unlike human sex, there is nothing shameful about yiffing. There are no obligations attached to yiffing either, so you can just yiff with me and it won’t mean anything. It’s just supposed to be fun. Let me show you.”
   Jack unpinned Clare’s shoulders and hopped around her playfully, panting, with his tongue wagging from his mouth. He barked, “Yiff! Yiff! Yiff!”
   Her arms free now, Clare grabbed a lamp off the floor and smacked Jack across the head with it. The lamp shattered over Jack’s head and he fell to the floor, knocked out. She grabbed her clothes and ran up the stairs, and through the basement door, and didn’t stop to dress until she felt the chill of the wintery air on her flesh.
   When Clare finished her story, Dr. Stern stood there in silence, shocked by everything he had just heard and unable to formulate a correct response. Finally he managed to stammer,“Then what did you do?”
   “I went back to LA where people are normal.”
   “Why did your father bring Jack?”
   “Oh, he doesn’t know. You don’t tell an old guy about a sexual orientation that didn’t exist when he was a kid. It reminds him that he isn’t young anymore.”
   “I’m getting on there in years myself.”
   “Oh, but you’re different. I don’t think of you as an adult.”
   Taking this as a compliment, Dr. Stern blushed and grinned broadly and stupidly.
   Meanwhile, in anther part of the jungle, Jack and Lewis made their way in silence.
   Then, Jack’s face suddenly lit up in a big grin and he began to skip around Lewis, who scowled deeply.
   Jack said, in a mocking sing-song voice,“Hey Lewis, wasn’t it funny how I blackmailed you to come on this trip?”
   Lewis whispered,“Shush.”
   “Because, you know, you really are nothing but a fraud.”
   “Shush.”
   “And the sad thing is that your daughter really believes in you.”
   “Shush.”
   Annoyed to wit’s end, Lewis quickened his pace. Jack followed and the two all of a sudden stepped into a clearing where a mere ten feet in front of them were dozens of bipeds, all of them three to four feet in height, and covered with orange fur. Lewis’s eyes widened and his heart missed a beat, but Jack continued skipping around him as before and said, “But the really, really sad thing is that you have fooled yourself as well.”
   Lewis whispered,“Jack, seriously, shut up," and continued to stare in awe at the creatures. Lewis was in shock from the sight of these tiny man-like animals that shouldn’t exist. As his head cleared he was able to make out more and more details. They were all male. Some of them had black spots, while others had black stripes, and some were all orange except for black hair on their heads. They jumped around playfully, and there was a pile of them play-wrestling with each other. Lewis’s first impression was that they gave off an overwhelming aura of immaturity. Lewis, full of pride, whispered to himself,“I have made an important discovery. I have discovered something new.”
   Jack, experiencing none of Lewis’s awe, took a few steps forward towards the creatures. Lewis whispered hoarsely, “Jack. Jack, stop.”
   Jack continued to inch closer towards the bipeds, his eyes fixed on them. The creatures continued to carry on with their play, unaware of Jack or Lewis, who resorted to begging.“Jack, please, we don’t know a thing about them. Don’t.”
   Jack ignored Lewis and continued forward. Lewis leapt after him, and Jack broke into a run and dove right into the middle of the pile of play-wresting bipeds, which all brought Jack into their play, tackling him and wrestling with him. Lewis looked on in horror as Jack rolled around with the creatures, laughing with joy and ecstasy. Lewis whispered,“Jack, get over here. Please.”
   Jack, rolling around beneath a pile of furry hominids, laughed and said,“But they like it!”
   Little hands playfully picked at Jack’s clothes, lifted up his shirt, and tickled him. Jack laughed ecstatically. Lewis, not wanting to miss what could be his only opportunity to capture a cryptid, lifted his tranquilizer dart gun in his large hands and shot one.
   Chapter 15
   Martin entered the small cavern where the three women who, like him, wore nothing but pith helmets and boots, were kept at the bottom of a deep pit. He told the other ebu gogo to leave, and they followed his order. Martin had expected the nude women at the bottom of the pit to jeer at him and call him names as they had the last time he visited them, but instead they all smiled at him and said together in a long drawn out drawl,“Hi Martin.”
   Martin was taken aback at the friendliness of the naked girls at the bottom of the pit. He didn’t know what to say, so he stammered a bit and then said, “Um, hi?”
   The redhead Amber did a big fake yawn where she stretched her arms out as far as they would go, sticking out her large, firm breasts. She said,“Oh Martin, we have been so bored down here, just three women, without a man to keep us company.”
   The brunette Christa clasped her hands behind her back, sticking out her perky, tear drop shaped breasts and said,“Yeah Martin. Won’t you let us up from here so we can keep you company?”
   Martin said,“No. I can’t let you up.”
   The blonde, more mature Linda dug the toe of her boot into the ground and said demurely,“Oh Martin, why not? We so want to be with you.”
   “Because the ebu gogo won’t let me.”
   Christa said,“The ebu gogo? Those animals? I don’t know why you like them so much, especially when there are real, human women right here, who you could be with, if you wanted to.”
   Martin said,“But you girls hate me.”
   Linda said,“Oh Martin, don’t you understand anything about female psychology? We don’t hate you. We were acting the way we did because we were jealous of the way you were giving that ebu gogo Lua all of your attention. But then we realized the folly of our ways. We really do like you Martin. We really do want to be with you.”
   Martin should not have believed the confessions of desire from the three naked women in the pit. But he was reeling from the loss of Lua just moments earlier, and couldn’t shake the feeling that he had been abandoned by her, and that she not telling him that their offspring would kill her was an act of betrayal.
   He also thought about all of the other ebu gogo he had impregnated, and realized that when their due dates approached, they would all die too, because the babies, having half of his DNA, would be too large to fit through the ebu gogo’s small birth canals, and would break through their wombs and stomachs as well.
   And he knew that the reason the ebu gogo didn’t tell him that his seed would lead to their deaths is that they weren’t human, and didn’t have a human’s developed sense of right and wrong.
   But these women in the pit, they were human. Their humanity showed as they clasped their hands behind their backs and above their heads and stuck out their chests at him. Their breasts were firm, and didn’t hang down below their hips like the ebu gogo’s breasts did. At thirty-eight Linda was older than the other two and her breasts had a few stretch marks here and there, but she was undeniably beautiful and somehow her stretch marks only accentuated her beauty. He watched as the women pivoted on one foot, winked at him, and blew kisses at him from the bottom of the pit, all while professing their desire for him with brief, teasing words.
   Martin couldn’t take it any longer. He knew that he couldn’t let the women out of the pit. That would be a recipe for disaster. But, what he could do was climb down into the pit with them. There was a hand-woven rope at the side of the pit that the ebu gogo used to lower food and other things to the women. One end was tied to a rock outcropping at the side of the pit, and the rest was coiled at its edge. Martin tested the rope and decided that it would hold his weight, so he removed the bamboo grate, took the rope in his hands, and slowly climbed down into the pit where the naked redhead, brunette, and blonde women waited at the bottom.
   Of course Amber, Christa, and Linda did not really want Martin. They hated his guts. But they wanted to talk him into helping them to escape from the pit so they could kill Lua, who they didn’t know had just given birth and was dead, and escape from the horrible jungle. In order to do all that, they had to seduce Martin, and to make him dependant on them for sexual gratification instead of on the ebu gogo.
   Martin reached the bottom of the pit, and the three women grabbed him at once and made a show out of pushing each other out of the way and pulling him towards themselves as they pretended to compete with each other to make out with him, grabbed his dick from each others’ hands, and tried to mount him. Then, a high pitched scream came from above them. All four looked up to see the three ebu gogo guards looking into the pit with horrified expressions on their faces, screaming, “Eeeeeee, Eeeeeee, Eeeeeee,” as their enormous breasts swung back and forth above the heads of the humans in the pit like pendulums.
   Chapter 16
   Lewis, Jack, Dr. Stern, and Clare stood around the rocky clearing. The moment the interns arrived, Dr. Stern turned to Lewis impatiently and said,“Now that everybody is here, can you please stop being so mysterious and show us what you found?”
   Lewis motioned with his hand for everybody to follow and led them through the jungle to a clearing with a large tree in its center, where the cryptid Lewis had tranquilized earlier had a rope tied around his neck like a leash. The other end of the rope was tied to a low hanging branch. Dr. Stern, Clare, and the interns gaped at the cryptid in amazement as it jumped around and chattered happily, in apparent oblivion to the fact that it was a captive. Lewis said,“Ladies and gentlemen, I have discovered the ebu gogo.”
   Lewis took a dramatic pause, and Jack, taking advantage of the silence, put his hands on his hips and said,“Hey! I discovered the ebu gogo!!!”
   Lewis angrily shouted,“You did not! You were so busy babbling on about nonsense that you didn’t even notice them.”
   “Oh, I noticed them,” Jack said smugly, “I just didn’t say anything because I wasn’t surprised.”
   Lewis roared,“You were so surprised when I pointed them out to you!”
   Dr. Stern furrowed his brow and said,“Both of you stop it. Mr. Dare, I think everybody here is willing to accept that it was you, not Jack, who discovered the ebu gogo. The question is, what do we do now?”
   Lewis said,“Now, we bring it back to New York!”
   Dr. Stern said,“We need to study the ebu gogo before we can bring it back to New York, given that we don’t even know what it eats.”
   Lewis angrily shouted,“Five minutes ago you didn’t even believe in the ebu gogo!”
   Dr. Stern looked at the ground. As hard as it was to admit he was wrong, he grudgingly said,“I’m sorry, I’m sorry. They exist.”
   Speaking in an overdramatic way that always got on Lewis’s nerves as he gestured like a bad actor, Jack said “Lewis, I think it is excellent that we have captured an ebu gogo. Just wonderful. But just think: There were many varieties of ebu gogo in that clearing. Some were spotted, some were striped, and some were all orange with little clumps of black hair on their heads. Imagine how great it would be if we returned to New York with a collection of ebu gogo!”
   Clare rolled her eyes and said,“Jack, they aren’t Pokémon.”
   Jack ignored Clare and continued,“And consider this: Our furry little friend here is male, and all the ebu gogo we saw were male. Don’t you think he would be happier in New York if we found him a lady friend before we left?" Jack sauntered over to Clare and whispered in her ear, “You know, somebody to yiff with?”
   Dr. Stern overheard Jack’s whispered words and his jaw dropped. Clare clenched a fist and whispered back, “Take one step closer and I drop you.”
   Jack sauntered away from Clare and continued,“I don’t want to leave Flores yet. I am having too much fun. And I like having fun. Fun keeps me distracted. I don’t want to do bad things when I am having fun." Jack sauntered over to Lewis and whispered into his ear, “When I am having fun, I don’t want to blackmail people.”
   Once again Dr. Stern overheard Jack’s whispered words, but not knowing the context, took it as further evidence of Jack’s delusions.
   Lewis however, knowing that Jack’s threat of blackmail was real, announced “Let’s put this to a vote. Who wants to stay on Flores?”
   Dr. Stern and Jack raised their hands.
   Lewis then asked,“And who wants to go back to the mainland?”
   Clare and the three interns raised their hands.
   Jack put his hands on his hips and gave Lewis a threatening glare. Lewis caught Jack’s glare, glanced at his feet uncomfortably, looked up and exclaimed, “Then it’s settled. Since interns don’t count, the vote is two we stay, one we leave. We will search for more ebu gogo, learn more about them like Dr. Stern wants, and try to capture different varieties of ebu gogo while keeping an eye out for a female one, like Jack wants. This way the majority is happy.”
   The three interns grumbled amongst themselves, but they accepted without protest the casting net that Lewis gave them and walked off together into the jungle.
   The three interns had not walked long when they came upon a thin patch of jungle where dozens of male ebu gogo were hopping and skipping about playfully. The short fat intern and the tall skinny intern held the casting net at either end and slowly approached the ebu gogo, who continued with their play, apparently unaware of the two interns. But when the interns threw the casting net, the ebu gogo all jumped out of its way. The ebu gogo did not, however, try to run away from the clearing, but instead hopped and skipped around the interns.
   The two interns threw the casting net at the ebu gogo again, and again they jumped away. The fat intern noticed that right after they jumped, it looked as if the ebu gogo all giggled. Astonished, the fat intern said,“This is fun for them! They are treating us trying to capture them as a game!”
   The skinny intern looked at the giggling ebu gogo and said,“I have to agree. It’s as if we have suddenly found ourselves in a gamelit version of Pokémon.”
   The interns went back to trying to capture ebu gogo with the casting net, and the ebu gogo continued to treat it as a game, and to run around playfully in order to avoid the net whenever the interns cast it. Gradually though, the interns began to get better at capturing ebu gogo as their skill improved, and whenever they caught one, they brought it back to the tree where the first one was still tied, and tied it there as well. As they went, the interns came up with a scoring system in which the different varieties of ebu gogo, spotted, striped, all orange, etc. were worth different amounts of points, so that the three could compete with one another.
   Shortly after they went off together, Dr. Stern said to Clare,“Just so we are on the same page, I have no intention to participate in capturing an ebu gogo. If we see one, which is not likely, we will observe it in its natural habitat. If we do not see an ebu gogo, which is more likely, we will just walk around a bit and then come back, but either way we will return empty handed.”
   But after a very short time walking, they came across a large group of male ebu gogo performing summersaults, cartwheels, and other acrobatics. Dr. Stern and Clare immediately began to observe them.
   When Dr. Stern leaned forward to get a closer look at an ebu gogo, another ebu gogo snuck up behind him and took his pith helmet. Dr. Stern chased the ebu gogo around trying to get his helmet back, slipped on a patch of mud, and landed in a mud puddle with a huge splash.
   Clare laughed uproariously. Dr. Stern said,“It’s not funny.”
   Still laughing Clare said,“Oh yes it is.”
   Dr. Stern got up, wiped the mud from his face and shook it from his hands. The ebu gogo danced around him teasingly holding his pith helmet out for him to take. But when Dr. Stern lunged after the ebu gogo and grabbed at his helmet, the ebu gogo pulled it away so that he missed. Clare laughed and laughed with tears streaming down her cheeks. Finally, Dr. Stern grabbed the ebu gogo, lifted it off the ground, and pried his pith helmet out of its little hands.
   But now that he had captured the ebu gogo, it wouldn’t leave his side, so he had no choice but to bring it back to the tree to which, thanks to the interns, who had by now achieved expert level at capturing ebu gogo, there were now almost twenty male ebu gogo tethered, jumping around playfully, seemingly oblivious that they were captive.
   Jack went off to search for ebu gogo alone and after some aimless rambling, wandered into a field of ebu gogo. He looked around at all the ebu gogo frolicking playfully in the flowers and grass, and his face lit up like Imelda Marcos in a shoe store. He picked an ebu gogo up at random by the nape of its neck and looked at its groin. It had a little penis and little tiny balls. Jack threw it back to the ground in disgust. He looked at another ebu gogo’s groin, and another’s, and another’s, but they were all male, so he threw them back to the ground in disgust. He did this until he got tired and sank to the ground with a frustrated look on his face.
   An ebu gogo approached Jack excitedly, and jumped around playfully trying to get Jack’s attention. Jack picked the ebu gogo up and dug his pocketknife into its heart. The ebu gogo reacted by laughing as if it was being tickled. When the ebu gogo finally stopped laughing, because it was dead, Jack skinned it with his knife. Jack wrapped the ebu gogo skin in plastic and stuffed it in his backpack. He stuck his knife into another ebu gogo and began to skin it alive. The ebu gogo laughed as if it was being tickled until it died.
   In another part of the jungle Lewis, who had always been proud of his anatomical drawings, sat cross legged, as he sketched ebu gogo in their natural habitat with charcoal. An ebu gogo looked over his shoulder, curiously watching his hand move over the paper, and then grabbed Lewis’s charcoal and paper. Lewis lunged after the ebu gogo to get his charcoal and paper back, but the ebu gogo avoided him by hopping and skipping, and playfully held the charcoal and paper just out of Lewis’s grasp. Then, the ebu gogo scribbled all over Lewis’s drawing with the charcoal. Lewis shouted, “God damn it!”
   The ebu gogo all jumped up and down in joy and tried to imitate him, but it came across more as,“Gahdamma! Gahdamma!”
   Lewis’s jaw dropped open and he gazed at the ebu gogo in amazed wonder. He took a notepad out of his pocket and wrote, “Note: The ebu gogo can talk.”
   Chapter 17
   Martin was in a cavern surrounded by angry female ebu gogo. They shouted things at him in the ebu gogo language like,“How could you,” “You don’t love us anymore,” “Fuck off,” “Get out of here,” “Leave us alone,” and “Traitor to the ebu gogo!”
   Martin, with tears streaming down his cheeks said,“I do love you. I do. Don’t you see? That is why I went into the pit with the human women. I did it because I was upset by Lua’s death. That proves that I love you.”
   An ebu gogo shoved a spear into Martin’s hand and said, “What will prove that you love us is if you kill those humans.”
   Martin recoiled.“But I couldn’t.”
   “Then you still consider yourself human and not ebu gogo?”
   The ebu gogo that was speaking had breasts that hung only to her belly button, making them unusually small by ebu gogo standards. Martin did not like her as much as the others. He said,“Of course I consider myself human. I am a human.”
   As if on signal the ebu gogo parted, and two ebu gogo approached Martin, holding a baby in their arms. It took two of them to hold the baby, because the baby was too big for just one of them to carry. They brought the baby over to Martin. Awestruck, he reached out his hands and took it. It was his son.
   Tears came to Martin’s eyes once again as he looked down at the boy. Before his had been tears of remorse. Now he cried tears of joy. The child was the size of a regular human baby, but it was covered in a fine downy orange fur, which Martin thought would one day turn into the thick fur that covers the ebu gogo body. Its face was halfway between a human being’s and an ebu gogo’s. Its nose was not as flat and broad as theirs, its forehead didn’t slope back at the extreme angle that theirs did, but protruded like Martin’s, and while the ebu gogo were completely without chins, the child had a very little,if not very prominent, chin. The infant was definitely a human-ebu gogo hybrid, and to Martin, he looked beautiful. Crying, Martin said, “My own son. My flesh and blood. I will name him First, because he is the first of his kind. No, that’s stupid. I think I will go with Bob. That’s a nice, simple name.”
   The ebu gogo that had spoken before said,“You are still connected to your humanity, through those women. So in order to sever your last tie to humanity and join us completely, you must kill them.”
   Martin said,“I have a better idea. What if instead of killing the human women, we make them into ebu gogo?”
   “What do you mean? Explain yourself.”
   “Well, before she died Lua said to me that there are male ebu gogo that live on the surface, separate from the women. You want to create a new breed of ebu gogo that is half human. What if we mate the human women with the ebu gogo males? Then, because the human women are so much larger than the ebu gogo, they won’t have to die when the baby is born, and could produce even more offspring. Then, the human women will become my sisters, and I won’t be attracted to them anymore because one cannot be attracted to one’s own sister.”
   The ebu gogo all burst into laughter. It was a loud, high pitched sound that rang for minutes before subsiding. Another ebu gogo that had breasts that hung almost to her knees, as an ebu gogo’s breasts should, said, “We laugh at your ignorance. The male ebu gogo are incapable of having sex with us because of their small penises. Those human women, because of their enormous size, would require even larger penises to penetrate them than we do.”
   Martin said,“Well, why don’t you humor me and try it anyway?”
   The ebu gogo murmured to each other and decided it would be funny to try to mate the human women with male ebu gogo. So, they went to the pit where the women were, dropped the rope to the floor of the pit, forced the women to grab onto it by threatening them with their spears, and it took a dozen ebu gogo holding the rope as they one by one lifted the women to the surface.
   Linda was the first one up and when she reached the top she demanded that Martin tell her what was going on. Martin just brushed his hand through her blond hair and said,“Shhh. Shhh. You are going to become my sister.” And when Amber and Christa arrived to the surface Martin brushed his hand through their red and brown hair as well and told them that they were going to become his sisters.
   The ebu gogo surrounded the women, pointed the tips of their spears against the women’s naked bodies, and force-marched them out of the caverns.
   The ebu gogo forced the women to march through the jungle until they came to a clearing. Then, they used their spears to force Christa to lie down on her back so that her perky little tear drop shaped breasts pointed straight up at the sky. They held her there, pinned to the ground at the points of many spears.
   Then, a female ebu gogo approached Christa, pushing a male ebu gogo in front of her. The male ebu gogo chattered happily and jumped around completely oblivious of its surroundings, as male ebu gogo do. But Christa didn’t know how innocent and harmless the male ebu gogo were. Her only experience had been with the female ebu gogo, so she assumed that if the women were as vicious as they were, then the males must be even worse. So, she crossed her legs at the thighs so that nothing could be seen of her vagina butthe dark brown pubic hairs that sprouted from her groin. She squirmed beneath the spear points of the female ebu gogo, trying to keep the male from entering her even though it wasn’t trying to. Martin said, “Shhh. Shhh. Calm down. Open your legs so you can become my sister.”
   But Christa didn’t calm down. She continued to cross her legs as hard as she could as she kicked out at the male ebu gogo, who took the blows of her feet happily, oblivious that she was trying to hurt him, and that he was supposed to be trying to have sex with her.
   Finally the female ebu gogo gave up, and one quickly thrust her spear through Christa’s heart as another ran a spear through the male ebu gogo. The male ebu gogo laughed as if it were being tickled and then died.
   Then, they forced Amber to the ground. Linda shouted,“Don’t try to fight it. Just let them do to you what they are going to do, or they’ll kill you too. We can abort the fetus later if there is one. Just close your eyes and take it.”
   Martin brushed a hand through Amber’s red hair and said, “Yes. Just let the ebu gogo do it. Then you will be my sister.”
   Amber lay on the grass with her legs spread wide, revealing a fire-red bush that after over a month of captivity was as wild and overgrown as the jungle around them, as the ebu gogo held her there at the points of their spears.
   A female ebu gogo pushed a male ebu gogo forwards towards Amber’s red bush. The male ebu gogo jumped around and chattered happily as male ebu gogo do. Then, when it saw Amber lying on the grass, it jumped on top of her and started playing bongo drums on her large, firm breasts. Amber lay there completely still with her eyes shut tightly, expecting the ebu gogo to enter her and rape her.
   When the ebu gogo did not enter her, but instead just sat on her stomach and continued to slap her gravity-defying breasts with its open palms as it played drums on them, she opened her eyes, looked at the innocent smiling face on the creature that sat on her stomach, and said,“What the hell?”
   A female ebu gogo drove her spear through the ebu gogo on top of Amber and through Amber’s heart and she died with the laughing male ebu gogo pinned to her.
   Then the ebu gogo poked Linda with their spears and forced her to lie own on the grass. Her heart beat rapidly. She didn’t know what to do. If she fought the male ebu gogo, she would die, and apparently if she didn’t fight the male ebu gogo she would die anyway.
   Linda happened to glance at her side and saw a gun lying in the grass. She couldn’t believe it. It was her gun. The ebu gogo must have left it there, fearing it, or more likely, not even knowing what it was. If she could reach over and grab it, she could fire it, and then maybe the noise would scare the ebu gogo just as it had before.
   The female ebu gogo were pushing a male ebu gogo towards the blond bush of her vagina. She quickly grabbed the gun, and pulled the trigger. The gun went off with a bang and the ebu gogo all fell to the ground on their backs, waved their arms and kicked their legs into the air and screamed,“Eeeeeee, Eeeeeee, Eeeeeee.”
   Linda jumped to her feet and sprinted into the jungle.
   Martin shouted in the ebu gogo language,“What are you doing? Get up! After her!”
   Finally, Martin managed to calm a few ebu gogo and get them to their feet. He shouted at them,“Come on. We have to get the girl.”
   The ebu gogo that were standing picked their spears up off the ground, threw their enormous breasts over their shoulders, and ran off into the jungle with Martin yelling the high pitched war cry of the ebu gogo,“Yeyeyeyeyeyeye!!!!!!”
   Martin and the ebu gogo ran through the jungle, the ebu gogo swinging their arms in semicircles and lifting their knees high off the ground, their breasts flapping in the wind behind them, their spears held overhand above their heads, and quickly reached Linda.
   Linda, hearing their approach because of their loud war cry, turned and fired her gun blindly at the ebu gogo, hitting one, who fell to the ground dead, as the others, startled by the noise, fell onto their backs and screamed,“Eeeeeee! Eeeeeee! Eeeeeee!”
   Martin shouted,“What are you doing? Come on. Get up! Get up!”
   Finally Martin managed to get the ebu gogo to their feet. He was going to lead them after Linda again, but he looked at the dead ebu gogo on the jungle floor, and realized that when they reached Linda she would shoot another, and the rest would fall to the ground again scared of the noise, allowing Linda to get away once again. So, he went back to the caves with the surviving ebu gogo.
   Linda meanwhile continued to run through the jungle with her gun gripped in her trembling hand, naked except for her pith helmet and boots, and didn’t stop until she limped out of the jungle and stumbled into the Keo village. Although she was ordinarily well put together, and had been known to fret over an out of place eyelash, she was now covered in blood, mud, and sweat, which matted her hair down over her neck and face. She was still beautiful, but where she was ordinarily supremely confident, and was famous for the cocky twinkle in her eye and her confident smile, now her eyes were now glazed over, and her jaw twitched with PTSD.
   Villagers poked their heads out of their huts and approached her cautiously, and as they did she collapsed. Chief Bononbun told some women to carry Linda’s limp form to a hut where they washed her wounds with a sponge that they dipped in salt water.
   The women gave her a cloth and a string to tie it around her waist with, which was the only garment of clothing worn by the Keo, and took her to see Chief Bononbun.
   Chief Bononbun took a piece of paper from a drawer of the desk where he handled the island’s administrative duties and said, “I hesitate to show you this, given what you must have just been through, but before Lewis left to search for the ebu gogo, he insisted that I give this to you immediately upon your return.”
   Bononbun handed Linda the sheet of paper. She took it with shaking hands. On it was a handwritten note in what she knew was Lewis’s handwriting. The note read, “I got to Flores faster than you thought I would, Linda, and I will return to New York with an ebu gogo while you will probably return to the Keo village without ever even finding one. Ha. Ha. Ha. Ha.” The note was signed, “Your ex-husband, Lewis.”
   Linda looked up from the paper. Although the ordeal of the last month had hardened her emotionally, she suddenly became very upset. Lewis was in danger.
   Linda looked up pleadingly and said,“Chief Bononbun, please, your tribe has to help me. Lewis and whoever else he brought are in great danger. We need to rescue them. My God, he probably brought our daughter with him. Clare.”
   Chief Bononbun said,“I am sorry, but the Keo people will not go into that part of the jungle. The ebu gogo would get their revenge on us, for what our ancestors did to them eight generations ago. We have what you might call an informal treaty. We don’t go to where they live, and they don’t go to where we live. That is the way it must remain.”
   Linda shut her eyes tightly, dreading the decision she knew she had to make. She said,“Do you have my gun and my pith helmet?”
   The chief took Linda’s gun and helmet from another one of the drawers in his desk and handed them to Linda.
   Linda took the gun, put on her helmet, and said,“Goodbye Chief Bononbun. I hope to return to your village soon with Lewis, Clare, and whoever else they brought with them.”
   Linda turned and calmly walked out of the hut holding her gun in her hand and wearing nothing but her helmet, boots, and a native loincloth, walked right up to the edge of the jungle and started back the way she had come.
   Chapter 18
   The three interns were trekking back through the jungle to go capture more ebu gogo, when the short fat intern turned to the tall skinny intern and said,“I think we should split up here.”
   The tall intern, shocked, responded,“Are you serious? I mean, I know things have been all fun and games capturing ebu gogo, but must I remind you that we are in the middle of a wild jungle?”
   “That’s just it," the fat intern replied. “I’m under a lot of stress and when I’m under stress I need to..." The fat intern motioned his head towards the petite Asian intern, too embarrassed to complete his sentence, hemmed and hawed, and finished simply with, “you know.”
   The skinny intern looked at his fellow interns in wide-eyed disbelief and said,“What the fuck is wrong with you two?”
   The fat intern threw the dart gun to the skinny intern, said“Fine. You can hold onto this," took the petite Asian intern’s hand, and led her off. The tall skinny intern stood there, holding the dart gun, with an incredibly annoyed look on his face, and called after them into the jungle, “Mr. Dare is gonna be pissed.”
   The voice of the fat intern called back from within the jungle,“We’ll meet back up in an hour.”
   In a secluded area surrounded by boulders, the fat intern pushed the Asian intern up against a boulder, and the two made out as they removed each other’s clothes. The fat intern’s tits were bigger than the Asian intern’s were, but she liked it, and fondled his boobs with a mischievous grin.
   Once they were both completely naked, the fat intern thrust his humungous ass forward and fucked the petite little Asian intern as she squealed in ecstasy. And then suddenly, from all around them, came an incredibly loud, incredibly high-pitched cry,“Yeyeyeyeyeyeyeye!!!!!!”
   The cry sounded as if it came from a dozen tiny voices. The Asian intern looked up and asked in a startled voice,“What was that?”
   The fat intern was completely lost in performing the sex act and distractedly replied,“Shut up, I need to focus," as he continued to fuck the Asian intern.
   The fat intern pointed his face towards the ground and shut his eyes tight in order to concentrate better, so he didn’t notice when a dozen ebu gogo popped up around them from behind the boulders. But the Asian intern looked at them with eyes that went as wide as they could given their slanted shape.
   These were different from the ebu gogo that the cryptozoologists had been capturing. While the other ones were all male, these new ones were all female and had enormous low-hanging breasts. While the other ones had gentle looking countenances, these new ones looked fierce. And while the other ones didn’t use tools of any sort, these new ones all had spears, which they held overhand, pointed menacingly at the two interns.
   The Asian intern screamed. The fat intern, who did not see the ebu gogo because he was looking at the ground, continued to fuck her with abandon. Finally, after stammering for a moment, the Asian intern shouted,“Doug! Doug! Get the Hell off of me!”
   The fat intern, or“Doug," as the Asian intern called him, looked up and saw the female ebu gogo staring down from all around them. Like the Asian intern, he had no idea what they were, but it was clear to both that these menacing hominids intended harm. Before Doug could react however, the female ebu gogo pounced and landed on the two interns. They pulled Doug off the Asian intern, and with little arms around their necks and little hands pulling at their hair, forced the two interns to the ground. Doug and the Asian intern lashed out blindly with their hands and feet, but the ebu gogo punched, kicked, and scratched them. More ebu gogo poured out of the jungle and lifted Doug and the Asian intern off the ground, and carried the two kicking and screaming interns away through the jungle and then into a cavern.
   The cavern was lit by many foot-long phosphorescent slugs that crawled all along the walls and ceiling, letting off a dark purple glow. Two ebu gogo near the front grabbed a slug each and used them to light the way as the rest carried the naked interns into a large chamber where they dropped them onto the rock floor.
   First, three ebu gogo crawled all over the Asian intern. Her chest was very flat, as is common with women of Asiatic races, and when the ebu gogo poke her chest they said excitedly,“Che-che. Ya che-che ya.”
   But then they poked her vagina through its black hair, gave each other confused looks, and said,“Coo-coo? Ne coo-coo ne.”
   Then, three other ebu gogo poked Doug’s massive boobs and said disappointedly, “Bee-bee. Ne bee-bee ne.”
   But then they poked and flicked his penis and said excitedly,“Wa-wa? Ya wa-wa ya.”
   The ebu gogo held Doug to the ground with the points of many spears and an ebu gogo crawled on top of him and moved her vagina back and forth over his penis as her low hanging breasts flopped all over Doug’s blubbery stomach. Doug screamed.
   Then, Martin happened to enter the chamber. The first thought Doug and the Asian intern had was that here was another human who could save them. Doug and the Asian intern did not understand what was going on when Martin turned to the females, and cried in the ebu gogo language,“How could you!”
   An ebu gogo answered back, in the same strange language that sounded like gibberish to Doug and the Asian intern,“What is wrong?”
   Martin screamed,“What’s wrong? What’s wrong? When I went into the pit with the human women, you called me a traitor to the ebu gogo! Now I find that you are all traitors to Martin!”
   “We are not traitors to Martin.”
   “Yes you are. You all made such a big deal when I went down to have sex with those humans. You made me bring them all out into the jungle, where you killed all except for the one that got away. And now I find you here, with another man?”
   “But Martin, we brought those women out into the jungle because we wanted to try to make them into your sisters, remember? You wanted sisters and we wanted to help you. But the human females could not become your sisters. But this man can be your brother. Don’t you want a brother?”
   Martin paused a moment. Then he answered dreamily,“Yes. Yes I do. I want a brother.”
   Doug had not understood anything that Martin and the ebu gogo had said to one another. Whimpering he said,“Please mister… Please help me.”
   Martin knelt down beside Doug and combed his hand through the curls on Doug’s head. He whispered, “I will help you. I will help you to become my brother.”
   Doug said,“I… what?”
   The ebu gogo got back on top of Doug as the others held him to the floor with their spears and slowly moved her vagina back and forth over his penis. He squirmed as much as the spears poking against his body would allow. His jelly roll of a penis remained flaccid.
   Martin dug his fingers deeper into the curly hair on Doug’s head and massaged his skull while whispering into Doug’s ear, “Shhh. Let her. You won’t like it at first, but you will learn to like it in time, and after that, you will learn to love it.”
   Doug whimpered,“But… but… I don’t want to love it. I don’t want to like it even. I don’t want to do it at all.”
   Martin straightened up and said,“But you will get to have a little baby. Do you want to see my little baby?”
   Martin turned to the female ebu gogo and said something in the ebu gogo language that Doug and the Asian intern did not understand. Two pregnant ebu gogo walked off to the entrance to the chamber, and returned holding an infant that was clearly half human and half ebu gogo. They handed the baby to Martin, who held it out for Doug to see.
   Even though he had a female ebu gogo gyrating her hips above his penis which he was expending all the mental energy he had to keep flaccid, Doug managed to say,“What in Hell?”
   Martin said,“Sadly, my son Bob can’t nurse because his mother, a beautiful furry ebu gogo, the most wholesome and wonderful woman who ever lived, died in childbirth, but the ebu gogo taught me how to make baby food. Do you want to see how I make baby food and feed Bob?”
   Doug stammered,“N… n… no.”
   Martin said something in the ebu gogo language to the ebu gogo, and then another pregnant ebu gogo gave Martin some leaves. Martin put the leaves in his mouth and chewed, and chewed, and chewed them until they were nothing but mush in his mouth. Martin sucked down most of the saliva into his throat, leaving the mushy leaves in the pockets of his cheeks, which were puffed out in what is commonly called“chipmunk cheeks.” Then the same pregnant ebu gogo gave Martin a little live maggot. He put the maggot in his mouth and chewed it until it too became mush. Then, he released the mushy leaves from his chipmunk cheeks and mixed them together with the mushy maggot by swishing everything around in his mouth until it became a kind of paste.
   The infant Bob reached his head forward hungrily towards Martin’s mouth like a child reaches its head towards its mother’s breast. Martin leaned in, pressed his puckered lips to Bob’s puckered lips, and by slowly contracting his cheeks spat the concoction into Bob’s mouth, with his mouth puckered so that it came out of his mouth like toothpaste comes out of a tube as Bob hungrily sucked up the concoction.
   Then, Martin handed Bob back to the two pregnant female ebu gogo and said to Doug,“Don’t you want to be a daddy to a baby like Bob and get to feed him baby food like I do? You can be. And then we will be brothers.”
   Doug did not want to become a daddy to a baby like Bob. He did not want to feed it baby food. But, it had taken all the concentration he could muster to not become erect as the female ebu gogo moved its vagina back and forth, back and forth above his penis, and the bizarre sight of Martin making baby food in his mouth and feeding it to the half human, half ebu gogo hybrid had made him lose his concentration. Despite all his efforts not to, he grew hard and the ebu gogo was able to get the lips of its vagina around the tip of his penis.
   Doug cried and whimpered, begging her to stop. He concentrated with all the mental energy he had as he tried as hard as he could to not come inside the ebu gogo.
   The Asian intern saw that the ebu gogo were distracted watching the scene in front of them. She did not care about her own survival. But she knew that the monster Bob had to be destroyed. Bob was an abomination, a stain on the human race. Taking advantage of the ebu gogo’s distraction, she grabbed Bob out of the hands of the one who was holding it and with all of her strength hurled it against a rock wall, killing it instantly.
   Martin ran to Bob. The Asian intern turned and ran from the cavern as Martin wept over his dead child. Some ebu gogo turned and ran after the Asian intern.
   The Asian intern, completely naked except for her pith helmet and boots, burst from the cave into the jungle, and continued to run as the ebu gogo burst from the cave behind her with their breasts slung over their shoulders and their spears raised above their heads calling their war cry,“Yeyeyeyeyeyeye!!!”
   Chapter 19
   There were now dozens upon dozens of male ebu gogo tethered to the large tree, frolicking about and jumping around playfully as Dr. Stern and Clare photographed them. Jack sat in the shade of the tree, chewing on a blade of grass.
   When the tall skinny intern entered the small clearing, Lewis turned to him angrily and said,“Where have you been?”
   The intern cleared his throat and looked to the ground.“There’s a problem.”
   Lewis glared at him suspiciously.“Where are the other two interns?”
   “That’s the problem. I can’t find them.”
   “How is that possible?”
   The intern looked at his feet in shame.“We split up.”
   “You split up?" Lewis rose to full height and towered over the intern, looking down at him. “I did not tell you that you could split up.”
   The intern cowered as he explained,“I tried to stop them, but they wouldn’t listen to me.”
   “Why did they go off?”
   “They wanted to hook up.”
   “They’re an item?”
   “Yeah. They’re an item.”
   Lewis pinched the skin between his eyes.“Just great.”
   “Is that really important?”
   “Yes. Because now we are going to have to waste valuable time looking for those two knuckleheads.”
   “Doug and Stephanie.”
   “What?”
   “Their names are Doug and Stephanie," the intern replied, “And I have an idea about what happened to them.”
   Lewis’s eyes narrowed as he asked, “What do you think happened to them?”
   “The ebu gogo ate them!”
   Lewis laughed.“These little guys?" He walked over to the ebu gogo in order to illustrate. “First of all, they are only three to four feet tall, and they aren’t very strong.” He petted an ebu gogo and it purred and rubbed its chin against Lewis’s large hand. “And secondly, we have yet to see the ebu gogo display any form of aggression.”
   The skinny intern motioned a hand towards the happy, chattering ebu gogo and said,“But these aren’t ebu gogo!”
   Lewis gave the intern an impatient, annoyed look.“What are you talking about?”
   “This morning, when I saw the ebu gogo and chased it, it looked nothing like these guys.”
   “What did it look like?”
   “It was swift, and strong. It looked like a predator.”
   “You’re probably just imagining things.”
   Dr. Stern, who had been following the conversation silently, asked,“Why didn’t you say something before?”
   “Because nobody listens to interns.”
   Lewis said,“Memory has a way of playing weird tricks and I am absolutely, positively sure that we aren’t in any danger.”
   But just a split second after Lewis spoke the last word, the high pitched war cry of the ebu gogo came from the jungle beyond the clearing,“Yeyeyeyeyeyeye!!!!!!!”
   Everyone suddenly stood alert and looked around, trying to determine the source of the strange noise. Then Stephanie’s head appeared bobbing above the undergrowth as she ran towards them. Lewis relaxed and turned to his team in relief. “It’s just Doug and Stephanie playing a trick," he assured them, and called out into the jungle, “Doug, Stephanie, cut it out and get over here.”
   But then Stephanie burst through the brush into the clearing. Everybody looked at her in shock. She had a terrified expression on her face, and she wasn’t wearing a single garment of any sort, except for her pith helmet and boots. Lewis shouted, “Stephanie! Why are you naked?”
   But then the female ebu gogo that had been chasing Stephanie burst out from the undergrowth in their high stepped gait, their enormous breasts flapping in the wind behind them, and their spears held overhand above their heads. Everyone stood frozen in shock at the sight.
   Stephanie ran past the group and shouted,“Behind the tree,” as the ebu gogo let their spears fly. Ducking, everybody rushed for cover behind the large tree where the male ebu gogo, who still jumped around playfully, were tied.
   From behind the tree Lewis, the tall skinny intern, and Dr. Stern raised their tranquilizer dart guns into the air. Lewis counted to three and then he, the tall skinny intern, and Dr. Stern leaned around the tree trunk and fired at the ebu gogo that were rushing them. Dozens of small darts silently sprayed out of the barrels of Lewis’s and the intern’s guns, but not Dr. Stern’s, and zipped through the air towards the advancing ebu gogo, as the ebu gogo threw their spears. Lewis, Dr. Stern, and the intern ducked back behind the tree to avoid getting hit. The moment an ebu gogo was hit by a dart she stopped running and fell to the jungle floor passed out.
   Lewis shouted,“Dr. Stern, why didn’t you fire?”
   Dr. Stern said,“I did. But when I pressed the trigger nothing happened.”
   Lewis looked at Dr. Stern’s gun and shouted, “They’re rapid fire dart guns. You have to pull that lever over there.”
   Dr. Stern fiddled with the lever and said,“Rapid fire dart guns?”
   “Yes," Lewis boasted, “I designed them myself!”
   Lewis, Dr. Stern, and the tall skinny intern stepped from the cover of the tree and let loose another spray of darts. Once again, Dr. Stern’s gun did not work, but despite this the remaining ebu gogo that were rushing them all fell to the ground.
   Dr. Stern continued to fiddle with the levers on his dart gun as another wave of ebu gogo rushed them from the jungle. As the ebu gogo rushed the tree, Lewis and the intern fired a spray of darts, but there were many more ebu gogo this time, and a third gun was definitely needed, so Clare, exasperated at Dr. Stern, grabbed the dart gun out of his hands, set the levers, and sprayed the ebu gogo with tranquilizer darts. Clare, Lewis and the intern knocked out all the females with their darts, but then even more ebu gogo rushed them from the jungle. Clare turned to her father with a grim smile and said,“I love you so fucking much, Dad.”
   Lewis answered her back,“I love you too, Clare.”
   Both were about to step out from the cover of the tree to fire their dart guns again, but before they could, a gunshot rang out. Every single female ebu gogo that was not tranquilized broke into a panic as they fell to the ground, kicked their legs in the air and waved their arms, and shrieked,“Eeeeeee!!!! Eeeeeee!!!! Eeeeeee!!!!”
   Linda stepped from the jungle into the fray, holding a smoking .45. She wore nothing but a loin cloth, a pith helmet, and boots, and her eyes were hard as steel as she called,“Come with me," and quickly ushered everybody out of the clearing. But Jack, instead of going with her, ran into the fray of panicking ebu gogo.
   Linda shouted,“Come on, you moron." Jack ignored her, grabbed one of the tranquilized females, threw her over his shoulder so that her breasts hung down his back, and rejoined the others, and once they were together they ran off into the jungle as fast as they could go.
   As they ran through the jungle, Dr. Stern stumbled. Lewis grabbed him before he fell to the ground and shouted,“What’s wrong?”
   Dr. Stern said,“Spear nicked me. I’ll live.”
   Lewis looked down at Dr. Stern’s thigh. His pants were torn and he was gushing blood. Lewis lowered Dr. Stern to the ground, leaned him against a tree, and said, “Must have hit an artery. Intern, get me the first aid kit.”
   The tall skinny intern handed Lewis the first aid kit and he got to work on Dr. Stern.
   Dr. Stern said,“No. You all go on and leave me.”
   Linda said,“You are in worse danger here than you could possibly imagine.”
   As he worked Lewis said,“Linda, would you mind telling me why you are dressed in a native loin cloth, and Stephanie, would you mind telling me why you are naked?”
   Linda, remembering everything she had been through, trembled. Then she said, in a voice that wavered strangely,“The females… The females…”
   Dr. Stern, in a voice labored from pain and loss of blood, asked,“What do you mean, the females?”
   “It’s only the females you have to worry about. The males are harmless. The males are immature and stupid. The females are smart, vicious and psychotic. The males live on the surface. The females live underground.”
   “How do you know all this?”
   Linda said,“I made a couple of observations while I was held captive.”
   Everybody except for Stephanie exclaimed at once,“While you were held captive???”
   Stephanie said,“The man… The man who is with them, is he one of yours?”
   Linda then told them the story of what had happened to her, not leaving out a single detail, no matter how humiliating. She told them how she and the two female interns were held captive, and about Martin and his perverted degeneracy, and about how he had impregnated the ebu gogo leader. Once she was done, everybody sat in shocked silence.
   Then Stephanie said that the ebu gogo leader must have given birth. She described Bob, and told them how she had killed the abomination by throwing it against a wall, and how this facilitated her escape. She also told them that she had seen many pregnant ebu gogo during her brief captivity.
   Then Linda said,“Lewis, I came back here, putting myself in immanent, danger to make you an offer. I know this jungle, and I know how to survive here. As soon as you are done patching up your intern, I will lead you all back to the Keo village, but this does not mean we’re an item again.”
   Dr. Stern groaned, turned his head with difficulty towards Linda, and said,“I am not an intern. I am a respected scientist.”
   Lewis considered his ex-wife’s offer for a moment and then said, “Fine. But quit pretending you hate us. You just saved us, didn’t you?”
   “I do hate you. Just not so much that I want you to die. Anyway, gloating wouldn’t be much fun if you were dead.”
   “What do you have to gloat about?”
   “I discovered the ebu gogo before you did.”
   “Oh yeah? Where’s your proof?”
   Linda bit down on her lower lip as she thought bitterly about the recording she had made of the ebu gogo war cry when she had first heard it. That recording was gone. The ebu gogo had taken it when they took her clothes. Then, she smirked at Lewis and said,“Well, where’s your proof?”
   Lewis took a plaster cast from his pocket and said,“I made this from one of their tracks. I am sure it will be proof enough.”
   As Linda bit down on her lower lip again, a spray of tranquilizer darts whizzed through the air and struck her. She immediately fell to the ground. Lewis quickly turned to see where the darts had come from and saw Jack holding one of the rapid fire dart guns. Lewis rushed to Linda’s side and grabbed her gun from where it had just fallen, but before he could turn it towards Jack and shoot him, Jack fired again, hitting Lewis, who immediately fell back and dropped the gun. Clare lunged towards the gun but when she was midway there Jack fired another spray of darts at her. When they struck Clare she fell to the ground where she was. Jack then fired a spray of darts at Stephanie, the tall skinny intern, and Dr. Stern.
   Jack picked up the passed out female ebu gogo, slung her over his shoulder again, turned, and ran off into the jungle, leaving everybody sprawled out helplessly on the jungle floor.
   Clare said,“Uh-oh," and then thought a moment and asked, “How come we’re not passed out?”
   Lewis answered,“The darts aren’t strong enough for something our size. Luckily, we are merely paralyzed from the neck down. Can anybody move at all?”
   They all tried to move their limbs.
   Dr. Stern said,“No.”
   Clare said,“Nope.”
   Stephanie said,“No.”
   The tall skinny intern said,“No.”
   Linda said,“Not at all.”
   Lewis said,“Well, we’re certainly fucked.”
   A couple of small, furry male ebu gogo bounced joyfully into the clearing. They sniffed around the ground a bit, and then one went to a bush where the bright red berries that had given Lewis so much energy that morning grew, picked a berry, ate it, and jumped into the air ecstatically, with wide eyes and a big smile as he shouted,“Yeeeeaaaaaahhhhhh!!!!!!”
   More male ebu gogo ate berries from off the bush, and each one reacted in the same way, by jumping straight into the air and shouting,“Yeeeeaaaaaahhhhhh!!!!!!”
   Lewis sighed with relief and said,“This is it. We’re saved." Lewis looked over at the male ebu gogo, trying to get their attention with his eyes, and called to them, “Over here. Come here," and then said to his team, “I think I can communicate with them.”
   The tall skinny intern said,“How? Obviously ebu gogo can’t talk.”
   Lewis said,“I observed them talking earlier today. I forgot to say anything in all the excitement.”
   The tall skinny intern said,“Really?”
   Stephanie said,“Yeah. They can definitely talk.”
   Linda added,“In fact, you can’t get the fuckers to shut up. But even so, I don’t see how it does us any good.”
   Lewis explained,“The tranquilizer serum is a depressant. The berries are stimulants, and if I can get an ebu gogo to feed me one it should counteract the effect.”
   Dr. Stern, who lay paralyzed on his back, said,“That’s ridiculous. You keep on making these statements without any evidence to back them up.”
   Clare, who was frozen on her side facing Dr. Stern, narrowed her eyes, and said in a pissed off tone,“Really Dr. Stern? Really? I mean, we’re about to die so we might as well try something.”
   Lewis said soberly,“Dr. Stern, I find that when something seems like it should work, that usually means it will.”
   Then, Lewis turned to the ebu gogo and said as if he were talking to a dog,“Come here, boy. Over here.”
   A curious ebu gogo turned and approached Lewis repeating,“Cooome heahhh booy, ovahhhh heahhhh.”
   Lewis motioned to the berries in the ebu gogo’s hand with his eyes and said, “I am very, very hungry. Could I please have a berry to eat?”
   The ebu gogo stopped in front of Lewis and asked,“Mua?”
   Lewis shook his head yes and repeated back,“Mua.”
   The ebu gogo asked,“Mua Mua?”
   Lewis answered,“Muahhhh," opening his mouth wide like you do when a doctor asks you to say “Ah" and shaking his head yes.
   The ebu gogo stuck its finger into Lewis’s mouth and asked, “Mua?”
   Lewis looked at the berries in the ebu gogo’s hand and said, “No. No. Muahhhhh.”
   The ebu gogo held a berry out to Lewis and asked,“Mua?”
   Lewis motioned his eyes vigorously towards the berry and said,“Yes! Mua! Muahhhhh!”
   The ebu gogo put the berry into Lewis’s gaping mouth and exclaimed happily, “Mua! Mua!”
   Lewis chewed the berry. With much effort he got up, lumbered over to the bush where the berries grew, ate a few more berries off the bush, and stretched as movement came back to his arms and legs.
   Then he picked many more berries and fed some to Linda, Clare, the tall skinny intern, and Stephanie, and soon they were all on their feet and stretching as well.
   Dr. Stern, still paralyzed, said,“What about me?”
   Lewis answered disdainfully,“First you have to admit that I was right about the berries counteracting the effect of the tranquilizer serum, and that you were wrong.”
   Dr. Stern pleaded,“I’m sorry. I’m sorry. You were right and I was wrong.”
   Lewis contemptuously flicked a couple of berries into Dr. Stern’s mouth, turned to the group, and exclaimed, “That double crossing bastard! Trying to steal my glory!”
   Dr. Stern, who immediately began to get movement back in his arms and legs, and whose injuries, thanks to the power of the berries, no longer bothered him, said, in the most scientific and professional manner he could have possibly mustered,“Mr. Dare, that is not what’s going on here. You see, Jack is a furry, and to him the ebu gogo are real life furries, and after hearing Linda’s frankly astonishing story regarding Martin, he has decided that he wants to yiff with one.”
   Lewis said,“What you have just said means absolutely nothing to me, because nobody will tell me what in bloody Hell a furry is!”
   Lewis looked at Dr. Stern as if demanding an explanation. Dr. Stern mulled over how to answer for a moment, and then averted his eyes to the ground.
   Lewis turned to his daughter shouted,“Just what in God’s green kingdom is a furry?”
   Clare said,“Dad, can’t we just go the fuck home before the ebu gogo rape and kill us?”
   “I need to know. Now.”
   “Dad, it’s embarrassing.”
   “Tough. It is information that has just become vital to our mission.”
   Clare rolled her eyes, sighed, and rapidly said,“A group of people exists who call themselves furries, who are sexually attracted to pictures of anthropomorphic animals with realistic human genitalia, also called furries. The act of masturbating to these pictures is called yiffing. These individuals sometimes get together and wear furry costumes called fursuits and engage in a sexual practice, which they also call yiffing. Jack is one of these people, and in his sick and twisted mind he has decided that he wants to yiff with an ebu gogo.” Then she added, “Now can we go home?”
   Lewis took this all in and replied,“No. We have to go after Jack.”
   Clare shouted,“Dad! We have to get off this island!”
   Everybody shouted at Lewis at once in agreement with Clare, but Lewis quieted them by raising a hand and answered soberly,“If Jack is planning on raping that ebu gogo, we need to stop him.”
   Clare said,“Dad, why would we want to save the ebu gogo? They raped and killed mom’s team!”
   Lewis said,“Linda and Stephanie said that humans and ebu gogo can reproduce, and we all know how damaging a human-ebu gogo hybrid would be to humanity. Such a creature could do irreparable harm to the human genetic code if it were to mature and spread its genes with other humans. If Jack is planning on uh, err, yiffing with the ebu gogo, we have to stop him.”
   Linda said,“Damn you Lewis, why do you have to be right?” She picked her gun up off the ground, looked at it thoughtfully, and said, “But let me just say this: The only reason I am alive is because of this gun. The females are terrified by the noise it makes, and every time I fire it they go crazy and roll around on their backs, as you saw back at the clearing.”
   Lewis answered,“That’s good to know.”
   Linda finished,“But the problem is, I only have two bullets left.”
   Lewis said,“Then we’d better be quick.” He turned to the tall skinny intern and ordered, “Hey intern, gather up our things.”
   The intern straightened his back until he was standing at full height, bravely faced Lewis, and said,“My name is Charles.”
   Lewis, not used to being stood up to, was taken aback. He looked straight down at the ground and said,“I’m sorry. Charles. Gather up our things.”
   Charles lifted the pack and everybody made their way following Jack’s tracks.
   Chapter 20
   Deep within a cavern that was lit by the eerie purple glow of phosphorescent slugs that crawled along the walls and ceiling, Martin wept as he knelt over his dead son. He lifted the mangled form of his son off the ground and hugged it close to his breast as he continued to weep.“Bob,” he cried. “Oh Bob.”
   Some ebu gogo approached Martin in order to comfort him, and put their hands on his shoulders consolingly. Martin cried in the ebu gogo language,“Lua. Lua died for nothing.”
   An ebu gogo said,“Lua did not die for nothing.”
   “But she died to bring Bob into the world, and now Bob has left it.”
   Martin suddenly realized that there had not been any sort of funeral for Lua. He didn’t even know what had happened to her body. He had been so overwhelmed by her death and the birth of his son, and all of the varying and conflicting emotions that he had been feeling, that the thought of what had been done with Lua’s body after she died hadn’t even occurred to him until this moment. And of course, another reason it hadn’t occurred to him was because deep down, a part of him that he kept hidden from himself still considered the ebu gogo to be animals, and mourning the dead is reserved for the realm of humanity. He asked, “What… what do ebu gogo do regarding death? I mean, what are your rituals?”
   “Death is not important to us. What is important to us is life. That is why when one of us dies her memory is preserved in new verses that are added to The Song of the Ebu Gogo, ones that celebrates her life.”
   “Are… Are there verses about Lua in The Song of the Ebu Gogo now?”
   “There are.”
   “I would like to hear them.”
   “Of course not every ebu gogo knows every verse of the song. It is too much for a single ebu gogo to remember. We all memorize individual parts of the song, which we sing to each other. Sanna can sing you the verses about Lua.”
   The ebu gogo parted and the one called Sanna stepped forward, took a deep breath, and began to sing. Her song was a joyful one, and it recounted all of the important events in Lua’s life. As he listened to the song, Martin understood Lua in a way that he had never understood her before. He understood her as one who loved life and was full of joy. He understood her as someone who was very sensuous, and who lived for the enjoyment of pleasure.
   Unlike other times, Martin did not have a sick or queasy feeling as a result of having such thoughts about an animal. It wasn’t that the verses about Lua humanized her for him though. It was that while listening to the verses, Martin threw off the last remaining vestiges of his humanity, and now identified completely as an ebu gogo.
   As he listened to the verses Martin also understood that Lua had a serious side as well as a joyful and sensuous one. She was serious about the survival of the ebu gogo, and serious about creating a hybrid race with Martin, a race that would possess the superior attributes of humanity and be able to spread out around the globe and wrestle the earth from the human beings. She understood that there could only be one species at the top of the pyramid, and she wanted that species to be ebu gogo.
   She also understood that once the ebu gogo became the dominant species, humanity would slowly sink into extinction, just as the Neanderthal, the Homo erectus, and all the early species in the genus of Homo sank into extinction after being thrown off the top rung by the species right behind it on the evolutionary ladder. Lua was a revolutionary in that she wanted to replace the current ruler of earth, humanity, with a new ruler, the ebu gogo, but hers was a sexual revolution, not a violent one. Once the ebu gogo had slept their way to the top, nature would take care of the human beings.
   Sanna finished her song and Martin wiped the tears from his eyes. He said,“Thank you for that beautiful song. I understand now that Lua did not die for nothing. She lived, and that was something in itself. She experienced pleasure, and joy. She came up with a plan for the ebu gogo to follow. She accomplished so much in her life. I had no idea.”
   The ebu gogo who had been talking before said,“And what is in the song is not all that she accomplished. There are now many pregnant ebu gogo who will soon die in order to bring new life into the world. This is Lua’s gift to us. This is her legacy.
   Just then some weary, bleary-eyed ebu gogo stumbled into the cavern. They told everybody how they had chased Stephanie, and how they had run into the other humans who tranquilized them, and how when they awakened the humans were gone.
   Martin said,“I will lead you after the humans. We are going to do things in a slightly different way this time, but one that will be much more effective than your usual hunting methods. The humans will atone for Bob’s death by contributing their own seed to replace him.”
   Chapter 21
   As everybody made their way through the jungle following Jack’s tracks, Linda, Clare, and Lewis walked side by side, with Clare in between her two parents. After walking a bit in silence, Lewis turned to his daughter and said, “I must say, I am more than a little concerned about you.”
   Clare looked at her father quizzically and asked,“Why?”
   “This yiffing sounds like high-risk behavior and... Now Clare, you know your mother and I will love you no matter what, but Clare... You’re not a furry are you?”
   “No! Sheesh. Jeez.”
   Lewis breathed a sigh of relief and then asked,“What exactly happened between you and Jack?”
   Clare looked pensively at the ground and muttered inaudibly,“Muh-mmm-urr-muh.”
   Lewis said gently,“Now Clare, we’re your parents. You can tell us. It’s OK.”
   Clare, still staring at the ground, quietly said“He tried to rape me.”
   Lewis dug a fist into the palm of his other hand and looked forward. He decided then and there that when they found Jack, he was going to kill him. Linda, still suffering from PTSD, stared straight ahead, displaying no recognizable emotion.
   Meanwhile in another part of the jungle, a female ebu gogo that lay passed out on the ground next to a stream slowly awakened. Jack leaned over her, and when she saw him her eyes and mouth widened in lust. Jack was very gentle with her as he asked,“Yiff? Yiff?”
   The ebu gogo looked up at Jack expectantly. Guessing his meaning, it answered back,“Yiff. Yiff.”
   Jack kissed the ebu gogo on the lips, and she returned his kiss. The saliva of the two related species mingled in each other’s mouths. Jack removed his clothes and then kissed the ebu gogo on the lips again, and hairless human flesh pressed against ebu gogo fur. Then the ebu gogo breathlessly said, “Meh kear tahr wa-wa en mi coo-coo.”
   Jack didn’t understand what the ebu gogo’s words meant, but he understood her tone of voice. He moved his hips, rubbing his dick against her vagina. But, his dick did not grow hard. It remained soft and flaccid. The ebu gogo gave Jack a confused, questioning look.
   He tried to kiss the ebu gogo on the mouth again, but she moved her head from side to side so he couldn’t get a lip lock and said, in a more commanding voice than before, “Meh kear tahr wa-wa en mi coo-coo.”
   Jack stopped moving his hips and said,“I don’t understand. This is what I have always wanted, my entire life. And now that I have it right in front of me, I can’t do it. Why? Why?” Then, Jack leaned in and whispered sweetly into the ebu gogo’s ear, “I know why. It’s because I am in my human form. Why would I want to do itas a human? You see, I’m a furry too, just like you are. I know I don’t look like one. My body is practically hairless compared to yours, but inside, I am one, just like you. All I have to do is change into my fursuit and become my fursona.”
   Jack, who was naked, opened up his pack and took out the two bloody, plastic-wrapped male ebu gogo skins that he had secured earlier in the field when he skinned the two male ebu gogo alive. He carefully removed the skins from their wrappings and draped one over his shoulders, and the other one on top of his head. The ebu gogo’s eyes went wide with terror, and she went insane, flailing her arms and legs in panic as she screamed, “Eeeeeee!!! Eeeeeee!!! Eeeeeee!!!”
   Jack whispered,“Relax. It’s just me. Foxy McFoxtrot.”
   The ebu gogo continued to scream and flail her arms and legs. Jack became angry and said,“Why are you doing this? Why do you hate me?” Then, when the ebu gogo did not calm down, Jack clenched his fist and punched her in the face.
   The ebu gogo was stunned for a moment, and then once again flailed her arms and legs and screamed,“Eeeeeee!!! Eeeeeee!!! Eeeeeee!!!”
   Jack punched the ebu gogo again, and then got his erect cock inside of her.
   Meanwhile, Lewis, Linda, Clare, Dr. Stern, Stephanie, and Charles had lost Jack’s trail, and were trying desperately to find it. The sun had set and although the moonlight was enough for them to make out the shapes of things, it did not provide enough light to make out Jack’s footprints or other markings he might have left.
   They all examined the ground around them desperately trying to pick up Jack’s trail again.
   Charles said,“Maybe we should take out the torches.”
   Lewis said,“No, because then Jack will see our approach. We want to sneak up and catch him by surprise.”
   Then, they heard a sound in the distance that sounded like screaming, which went,“Eeeeeee!!! Eeeeeee!!! Eeeeeee!!!”
   Linda said,“That’s the noise the females make when they are panicking.”
   Then they heard another noise which went,“Ugh! Ugh! Ugh!”
   Linda said,“I don’t know what that noise is.”
   Clare said,“Actually, I think that’s Jack.
   Then, the“Eeeeeees” and “Ughs” alternated with one another, so now the sound went like this: “Eeeeeee," “Ugh," “Eeeeeee," “Ugh.”
   Lewis cried,“They’re yiffing! Quick, we have to stop them before it’s too late.”
   Lewis and the rest broke into a run, heading towards the noise. Then, they all stumbled into a clearing and everybody paused in shock and revulsion at the horrific scene in front of them. Jack, covered in bloody male ebu gogo pelts, his face alive with ecstasy, was fucking the female ebu gogo, who by this point was limp with resignation, her eyes shut tight to block out the horror of what was happening to her.
   Jack was so distracted by his depraved act that he didn’t even notice the arrival of the cryptozoologists.
   Lewis, quickly recovering from the shock of the scene, broke into a run, dove, and tackled Jack, knocking him off the ebu gogo and sending the furs he wore flying. Lewis jumped to his feet and kicked Jack in the ribs three times as the ebu gogo Jack had been on top of got up and stumbled into the jungle in a daze.
   Jack shouted,“Why are you doing this?”
   Lewis kicked Jack three more times and said,“Because you raped an ebu gogo and tried to rape Clare.”
   Jack said,“No I didn’t.”
   Lewis kicked Jack again and said,“I saw you just now.”
   Jack said,“But it wasn’t me doing those things. It was my fursona, Foxy McFoxtrot. When I put on my fursuit, I am playing a character.”
   Lewis climbed on top of Jack and pounded his face with his large fists as he yelled,“You fucking bastard. You son of a bitch.”
   Clare cheered her father on with a wave of her fist and a shout of,“Go Dad!”
   Jack spoke in between being punched.“If…" Punch, “You…" Punch, “Don’t…" Punch, “Stop…" Punch, “I’ll…" Punch, “Tell them.”
   Lewis spoke in between punches.“No…” Punch, “You…” Punch, “Won’t.”
   Then, Lewis put his hands around Jack’s throat and squeezed tightly. Jack tried to speak, but his windpipe was closed.
   Linda kicked Lewis off Jack, pointed her gun at Jack’s head, and asked in a voice lacking inflection, “Tell us what?”
   Jack caught his breath and then said boastfully in a croaking voice,“I blackmailed Lewis to come on this expedition!”
   Linda cocked her gun.“How did you blackmail Lewis?”
   Lewis got up off the ground and in a bit of a sweat asked Linda,“Is this really what we should be worrying about?”
   Linda said,“Shut up Lewis. I want to hear what the little fucker has to say.”
   Jack cleared his throat and said,“I threatened to tell the world that Lewis forged his famous scale from the Lake Champlain monster. That’s why he let me come.”
   Linda said,“And how would you know that?”
   Jack said,“Because I helped him create the forgery!”
   Linda turned to Lewis and asked,“Is this true?”
   Lewis held his head down in shame.
   Clare cried,“Dad! Say it isn’t so!”
   Jack said gloatingly,“Think about it. The only piece of actual physical evidence that has ever been presented in support of one of Lewis’s claims is a fake. Lewis is a complete phony. He’s a fraud. And you all follow him blindly.”
   Clare, visibly distraught, leaned a hand against a tree for support and said,“Oh my God. My head is spinning. Dad, you asshole.”
   Dr. Stern narrowed his eyes at Jack.“So you organized this elaborate blackmail scheme, just because you wanted to have sex with an ebu gogo, which at the time you didn’t even know really existed?”
   Jack beamed up at Dr. Stern.“Yes.”
   At that Clare stood up straight, walked over to Jack, and kicked him in the ribs. Liking the way his ribs felt on her foot, she kicked him again, and again, and broke into a flurry of kicks as she shouted,“You fucking furry!!! Fucking furry!!! Fucking furfag!!! Fuck!!! Fuck!!!”
   Linda put a hand on Clare’s shoulder and said, “OK Clare, my turn.”
   Clare stepped back. Linda straightened her arm, pointed her pistol at Jack’s head, said “Fucking furry," and pulled the trigger. There was a loud bang and Jack’s brains spilled out onto the jungle floor.
   Everyone stood in shocked silence and then Clare exclaimed,“Holy shit Mom! What the fuck?”
   Lewis took a few tentative steps towards Linda, held out his hand, and said,“Linda, give me that gun.”
   Linda pointed the gun at Lewis’s head. Lewis stopped in his tracks. Linda said in a cold, hard voice, “You were so boastful after our expedition to Lake Champlain because I wasn’t with you when you found your stupid scale. I couldn’t take your constant bragging, so I divorced you. And ever since our divorce, I have beentrying to beat you to your next discovery so that I could have something to brag about too. Now I learn that you made the whole thing up. You ruined my life with your lies, Lewis.”
   Lewis said,“But I lied for a very good reason. I knew that if I were respected as a legitimate cryptozoologist, I would some day be able to discover great things. And I was right. I have made a great discovery. I have discovered the ebu gogo.”
   Pointing her gun at Lewis’s head, her entire body trembling, Linda cried, “I discovered the fucking ebu gogo you bastard!”
   As Linda stood there with her gun pointed at Lewis’s head, everybody watched her in rapt silence, not knowing what to say, or what kind of move to make. Linda straightened her arm in order to brace it for the backlash that was to come. She said, “You’ve hurt me for the last time.”
   Clare cried,“Mom, don’t.”
   Linda’s finger slowly closed around the trigger. She said, “Goodbye, Lewis.”
   Lewis squinted as his mouth moved in a silent prayer. Then, a giant bat with a ten foot long wingspan swooped down from the sky, lifted Linda in its talons, and flew away with her.
   Lewis stood for a moment in disbelief that he was still alive and then shouted,“Let’s go.”
   Clare asked,“Go where?”
   “We have to follow that ahool. Come on.”
   “Dad, mom was just about to shoot you. How can you even think of saving her?”
   “Your mother and I have a very complicated relationship. You will understand when you are older.”
   Clare rolled her eyes.“I hope not.”
   A gunshot rang out. Lewis cried,“She’s out of bullets. We have to go, now!”
   Lewis ran off in the direction of the gunshot. Clare and the rest followed him until they reached a clearing where Linda, covered in bloody cuts, was fighting off many ahool with a heavy stick as they swooped at her from all sides, swiping at her with their sharp talons.
   Lewis called,“Quick Charles, the torches.”
   Charles hurriedly unpacked the torches as Dr. Stern asked,“Lewis, what do you have in mind?”
   Lewis said,“Do you remember last night when we lit the torches and there was that bizarre screeching? Usually when you light torches in the jungle everything becomes quiet. That screeching must have been the ahool. The ahool are nocturnal. They must be afraid of fire.”
   Lewis knelt down and lit a torch. Dr. Stern cautioned,“You have no proof that the ahool are afraid of fire and...”
   But before Dr. Stern could finish, Lewis took off into the clearing, waving his lit torch in the air. Dr. Stern called out,“Get back here! This is insane!”
   But the ahool were, in fact, afraid of the torch. As the giant bats screeched loudly and flew chaotically in all directions, Lewis made his way through the commotion, grabbed Linda around the waist, and led her towards the jungle, frantically waving his torch.
   But, the one torch was not enough to protect the two of them, and the ahool attacked Linda from the opposite side of Lewis’s torch. Lewis reached his arm around to try to scare the giant bats away from Linda’s other side, but when he did, he left his shoulder in the darkness, and an ahool grabbed onto his shoulder with its talons, causing him to drop the torch. More bats swooped in to attack.
   Clare, watching all this from the edge of the clearing, grabbed two torches from the pack, lit both of them, and ran into the clearing waving them frantically, until she reached her parents. She used the two torches to shield Lewis, who picked up his torch. She then handed one of her torches to Linda, who was covered in blood from the scratches all over her body, and the three made their way out of the clearing, fending off the ahool with their torches, but when they reached the others, they found them all sprawled out on the jungle floor, passed out.
   Linda saw primitive wooden darts sticking from their skin, which she recognized as the blow darts the ebu gogo had shot her with when she first encountered them all that time ago. She said,“Uh oh.”
   Then she felt a sting against her neck. Lewis and Clare also felt stings. And then as they passed out they saw Martin emerge from the covering of the jungle, leading a retinue of female ebu gogo. Martin said to the three who were in the midst of passing out,“Ordinarily, they try to scare their enemy with their war cry. But I told them all about the benefits of sneaking up on your enemies quietly. Aren’t I smart?”
   And then Clare, Lewis, and Linda passed out into darkness.
   Chapter 22
   In a cavern buried deep within the maze of caves that runs beneath the island of Flores, lit by the eerie purple glow of foot-long phosphorescent slugs that crawled along the walls and ceiling, six cryptozoologists, Lewis, Linda, Dr. Stern, Clare, Stephanie, and Charles groaned as they slowly awakened. The ebu gogo had removed all of their clothes except for their pith helmets and boots.
   Charles was the first to speak. He gave Lewis an accusing look and said,“A fine mess you’ve gotten us into.” And then, his voice dripping with sarcasm, he added, “That was a real good idea, going after Jack.”
   Lewis said,“There is no way I could have anticipated this.”
   Charles said,“God this internship sucks. I haven’t even learned anything.”
   Dr. Stern said,“This is no time for bickering. Look, I disagree with Mr. Dare’s methodology. We rushed into the jungle without a plan, and now it looks like we’re going to pay the price. But even I have to admit, he did discover the ebu gogo.”
   Linda said,“God damn it how many times do I have to remind you people that it was I who discovered the ebu gogo!”
   Dr. Stern said,“Well technically perhaps, but I get the impression that your decision to go to Flores to search for the ebu gogo in the first place was based off of Lewis’s research.”
   Clare said,“Oh come on Dr. Stern, even a fool has to be right eventually. This was just his time. I have traveled to six out of the seven continents with my father, sacrificing things that any normal girl my age enjoys like a steady boyfriend, a college education, and a career as a Hollywood movie star because I believed I was experiencing the romance of searching for new exotic species. But really I was just wandering around the wilderness aimlessly following a con man! I am as pissed at dad as mom is, well maybe not quite as much since I didn’t try to shoot him, but then again I didn’t have a gun, but you, Dr. Stern, have even more of a right to be pissed at dad than mom or I do.”
   “What do you mean by that?”
   “Dad’s the one who emailed the museum director that paper of yours, which by the way is very good, in order to get you fired from your job so you would have to accept his offer of one million dollars to come on this expedition. I mean, at least he has a right to lie to mom and me and ruin our lives because we’re family, but you’re a complete stranger.”
   Dr. Stern replied with icy reserve.“OK, do you know what Mr. Dare? You’re a crackpot.”
   Everybody sat in an uncomfortable silence for some time and then Martin entered the cavern with many pregnant, spear-wielding female ebu gogo. He looked at Stephanie and said,“Meh kear a trom tooh rahp mua tooh…” Then he paused and said, “Excuse me, I meant to say ‘I want to kill you for what you’ have done. Lua, et yamma, excuse me I mean Lua, ‘the love’ of my life, gave her life to bring our son into the world, and then you killed him. But when the ebugogo were inspecting you while you were passed out, they discovered that tahr coo-coo, excuse me, I meant to say ‘your vagina’ is unusually small. You see, the male ebu gogo wa-wa, excuse me I mean ‘penis’ is too small for them to have sex with the female ebu gogo. But your coo-coo is smaller than an ebu gogo’s, and they think that maybe it will be a good fit.
   Martin called back outside the room and spoke in the ebu gogo language, and some pregnant female ebu gogo prodded a happy, chattering male ebu gogo into the small chamber with their spears. Martin picked up the oblivious creature by the nape of its neck with one hand, and then reached his other hand to the ebu gogo’s groin and took its penis between his thumb and forefinger. He said, “Look at this little wa-wa. How sad! How pathetic! How could this little guy ever hope to pleasure such a sensual creature as an ebu gogo female with something this small?”
   While Martin was doing this, the male ebu gogo just continued to laugh and chatter, oblivious of its surroundings. Martin put the ebu gogo down and said,“But your coo-coo is so small, so tight. And now you are going to become my sister.”
   Lewis stepped forward and said,“Now listen here. I won’t allow this.”
   Martin said something in the ebu gogo language and ebu gogo rushed everybody in the room except for Martin and Stephanie, and pinned them to the wall with the points of many spears. Stephanie sat where she was, crying. She looked up and said,“Why… why are you doing this?”
   Martin said,“Oh, I guess that before you are forced to have sex with an ebu gogo, I should give you some sort of explanation as to why it’s happening. All right then. I will tell you the story of the origin of the ebu gogo, and perhaps then you will understand.
   “The ebu gogo have a song. This song is older than humanity, and reaches all the way back to the dawn of time. It has been transmitted orally by the ebu gogo from generation to generation, each generation adding its own story to the narrative, so that the song from beginning to end tells the complete and uninterrupted history of the ebu gogo. Not all ebu gogo know the entire song. Each individual ebu gogo is responsible for memorizing a portion of it, and the portion memorized by Lua happens to deal with the very beginnings of human evolution, and starts roughly two million years before thefirst human being was born.
   “Of course, I am not going to tell you the story the way Lua sang it. First of all, you would not understand the language it is in, and second of all, it is a work of poetry, and we are all scientists. But when I heard the poetry of the song, because of my background as a college student majoringin genetic anthropology, I was able to make sense of it, and so I am going to not only translate the story from the ebu gogo language into English, but from a poetic understanding of the world into a scientific one. The ebu gogo have their own names for things, and I admit to guessing how certain things correspond to things known by science. When I refer to Homo erectus and the Neanderthal, I am only guessing based on what I know about human evolutionary history that these are the species that the ebu gogo sing about in their song.
   “In our remote past, the entire world was covered by ice. But then in one part of the world, I am pretty sure the song means somewhere in Africa, the snow began to melt, and the earth there turned green. And within that green springtime, the apes, no longer having to worry themselves about keeping warm, began to talk.
   “The apes in that newly thawed world could talk to themselves, and understand themselves, but they could not understand each other, and therefore could not talk to one another. Then, a few apes realized that just as they were talking to themselves, their fellow apes were talking to themselves too, and they began to speak with and understand each other.
   “But, now that they could understand each other, they could also misunderstand each other. With the birth of communication also came the birth of conflict, and these talking no-longer-apes, which I take to be the species we call Homo habilis, fought bitterly with one another.
   “There was one faction though that did not want to fight. This group left their homeland order to find a land where they could live peacefully, and eventually wound up in what I assume must be Southwestern Asia.
   “This migration, however, took a long period of time, the song doesn’t specify exactly how long, but as it progressed the spines of the apes gradually began to straighten as the poor walkers were left behind and the good walkers continued forward, so that by the time they reached Southwestern Asia after many generations had gone by, they were walking upright. I interpret this to mean that the Homo habilis, during the course of their migration, evolved into the Homo erectus.
   “As a side note, and this is not in the song, it’s just something I learned in school, did you know that the species Homo erectus lasted nine times as long as human beings have been around? I mention this only to illustrate the enormous amount of time covered in The Song of the Ebu Gogo.
   “Anyway, the Homo erectus lived in Southwestern Asia in peace for thousands upon thousands of years until one day a new species in the genus of Homo, which I assume must be the Homo neanderthalensis, more popularly known as the Neanderthal, arrive in Southwestern Asia.
   “While the Homo erectus were extreme pacifists, the Neanderthals were violent and warlike, and immediately began a campaign of extermination against the Homo erectus for no other reason than that the Homo erectus lived on the land and the Neanderthals wanted it all for themselves.
   “This brings us to the first named character in the song, Asha, a Homo erectus woman. When she lived, it had been generations since the Neanderthals had first come to Southwestern Asia, and their campaign of extermination was all she knew. One day she peered from hidden safety at a plain below and her eyes narrowed into two wrathful slits as she watched the Neanderthals, with their spears, clubs, and stone knives, drive the Homo erectus to the center of the field and slaughter them. It made her so mad. The Homo erectus made tools, but they did not know how to make weapons. The Neanderthals did know how to make weapons, and it was her opinion that weapon making was the source of their superiority. The Homo erectus that were being attacked didn’t even fight back against the Neanderthals, because Homo erectus didn’t fight. But at any rate, she was sure that if the Homo erectus learned how to make weapons, they would retake the land.
   “That night as the small Homo erectus tribe Asha was a part of slept in a circle on the forest floor, Asha heard a horrible scream and sat up with a jolt. She looked around with wide frightened eyes as a band of Neanderthals killed her sleeping tribe one by one. Some Neanderthals bashed the Homo erectus heads in with clubs. Others drove stone-tipped spears though their hearts and throats.
   “A Neanderthal stood over Asha with a raised club. Another Neanderthal reached out and stopped the first Neanderthal’s hands. They spoke a bit in the Neanderthal language, which Asha did not understand. Asha didn’t know what they were laughing about or what their gestures meant, but she knew that as they spoke the rest of her tribe was being slaughtered.
   “The second Neanderthal took the club from the first Neanderthal, grabbed Asha by her hair, and dragged her off. Asha kicked against the ground, and clawed at the Neanderthal’s hand. He released her hair and softly clubbed her over her head, not hard enough to bash her brains in, or even to knock her out, but just enough to daze her. He took her by her hair again and dragged her limp body across the forest to a small cave.
   “Asha, although terrified, had not yet figured out what the Neanderthal wanted her for. It was so unthinkable, so outside the range of what was possible, that the truth did not occur to her until the Neanderthal grabbed the fern leaf fashioned around her hips and ripped it off with a violent tug.Her eyes widened with horror as she realized that something which had never happened before in the history of the world was now happening to her. She was having sexual intercourse with another species.
   “The Neanderthal finished and left and Asha stumbled out of the cave. Her tribe was dead, and the only future she saw for herself was death. But, she was soon surprised to learn that she was with child. She had not thought such a thing was possible. Three moons later she gave birth, alone in the cave where it was conceived, to the first Neanderthal-Homo erectus hybrid.
   “Asha held her newborn baby in her arms, but there was none of the awe of the new mother in her face. There was nothing but determination. She had found her weapon.
   “Shortly after giving birth Asha searched out other tribes of Homo erectus, showed them her baby, and gave instructions to any young women who would listen.
   “Many years later Asha sat on a small hill at one end of a green, flowery field, her youngest half Neanderthal daughter standing at her side with a bulging belly of her own.
   “Down in the field below, Homo erectus women frolicked playfully among Neanderthal men with clubs. Early on Asha had realized that Neanderthal men liked a little chase, so she instructed the Homo erectus women to elude them a bit. The Homo erectus women had also learned that certain things, such as putting the scent of flowers upon themselves, painting their lips red and their cheeks pink, tying their hair up, and wearing their leaves in a way that accentuated certain parts of their bodies, made the Neanderthal men chase them harder.
   “So, down in the field, the Homo erectus women, each woman made up to out-do the other Homo erectus women, made a game of dancing, skipping, and running from the Neanderthal men with clubs. The Neanderthal men, being driven by nature, took the game a bit more seriously than the Homo erectus womendid, but still understood that the game was being played mostly for fun.
   “Whenever a Neanderthal man managed to hit a Homo erectus woman over the head with his club, she made a show of falling to the ground, and he took her by the hair, and she willingly allowed herself to be dragged off, and through the means of what The Song of the Ebu Gogo calls the clever weapon, although the species eventually went extinct, a part of the Homo erectus survived in the Neanderthal.
   “As a side note, and keep in mind that this is not in the song, this means that a part of the Homo erectus might also survive in the modern human, because when modern humans left Africa and encountered the Neanderthals, we did to the Homo neanderthalensis the same thing that they had done to the Homo erectus.
   “And just another quick side note, the song referring to sex as a weapon is an observation that has been made throughout human history by people much smarter than I am. It has often been said that wars are won in the bedroom, not the battlefield. This is why throughout history opposing parties atwar have encouraged their own side to breed, while doing things to discourage the other side from breeding.
   “At any rate, the discovery by Asha of the clever weapon led to a split within Homo erectus culture. One group of Homo erectus, which was mostly women, wanted all the Homo erectus to be completely absorbed into the Homo neanderthalensis through interbreeding, thus eliminating Homo erectus as a separate, independent species. The other group, which was mostly men, was completely opposed to interbreeding, and wanted to maintain the Homo erectus as a separate, independent species.
   “Of course, the big winner in all of this was the Homo neanderthalensis. With multiple sexual partners, both their Neanderthal mates and their Homo erectus mistresses, the Neanderthal men were able to spread their seed quicker and further than the Homo erectus men, who had a shortage of potentialmates because so many of the Homo erectus women went over to mate with the Neanderthals each generation.
   “Many generations of this go by and then comes the second named character in The Song of the Ebu Gogo, Seeter. Seeter was a man who was a part of the group of Homo erectus who were opposed to Homo erectus women mating with Neanderthals. But, he could also see that Homo erectus was losing the battle. The Neanderthals were killing the Homo erectus men in greater numbers, and each generation more and more women went over to the other side to mate with Neanderthals. So, Seeter proposed leaving Southwestern Asia to find a new home. This created another split within Homo erectus culture, between those who wanted to remain in Southwestern Asia, and those who wanted to go with Seeter.
   Seeter led his followers across the land, and all the way they were hunted by Neanderthals, which had by this point spread very wide, until after forty years of walking, they had completely crossed Asia and reached its Pacific coast. There they were still being hunted, the song says by Neanderthals but it was probably another species, the Denisovan man, because it was they, not the Neanderthals, that lived in that part of Asia, so Seeter, who was a very old man by that point, commanded the Homo erectus to cross the sea.
   “They built simple boats and crossed the Pacific until they reached the islands that make up modern day Indonesia. There, the limited resources afforded by the islands caused the Homo erectus to go through a very well documented evolutionary phenomenon called island dwarfism. Island dwarfism is when a species arrives on an island and, due to environmental factors such as a limited food supply, evolves to become very small.
   “As the generations passed and the Homo erectus gradually grew shorter and shorter, Homo erectus culture once again split into two groups. Up until this point the Homo erectus had been completely vegetarian, but now, one group of them finally began to fashion weapons in order to hunt with them, and to eat meat. This group evolved into the ebu gogo. The other group of Homo erectus did not want to learn how to make weapons and remained vegetarian. This group devolved into orangutans.
   “The ebu gogo lived in Indonesia in peace for thousands and thousands of years, until eventually their lives were upended by the arrival to Indonesia of modern man roughly 50,000 years ago. You stupid humans don’t even realize it, but humanity and the ebu gogo are locked in fierce competition with one another to be the dominant species on earth.
   “The ebu gogo has ambition, just like humanity once had before you reached the top and became complacent. That is why the ebu gogo have such a sexual interest in me. It is because they recognize my superiority. They want my superior genes for their own species, so that they can weaponize humanity’s superiority, your height, and your greater intelligence, against you. I know you all see my actions as perverted, but looking at it in this light, can’t you see? For the first time in the thousands upon thousands of years that have gone by since modern humans raped and killed the last of your close relatives other than the ebu gogo, which you didn’t know about, the clever weapon is being deployed by one species against another! So don’t you see, Stephanie? Don’t you see? A woman’s womb is the most potent weapon ever made or discovered, and now your womb will be deployed by the ebugogo in an assault against humanity! And if you resist, I will have an ebu gogo kill you with her shak. Excuse me, I mean her ‘spear.’”
   The male ebu gogo had been hopping and skipping on the ground next to Martin as he told his story, laughing and chattering as male ebu gogo always do. Martin said something to the female ebu gogo in the ebu gogo language, and many of them forced Stephanie onto her back at the points of their spears. Stephanie lay there crying and trembling with fear.
   Because it was only three feet tall, Martin had to kneel down in order to give the male ebu gogo a tap on its butt with his open palm and then said,“Come on boy. Go get her.” Martin tapped the male on the butt again, urging it forward.
   Stephanie screamed and cried as the male ebu gogo stood just inches away from her vagina and danced in a kind of shimmy while completely ignoring her. Linda said,“Don’t worry Stephanie. The males are, err, they can’t or won’t perform.”
   Martin said,“Oh I think I can get this little guy here to perform. I think the female ebu gogo just aren’t patient enough with the men. I love all of my little darlings, but they can be aggressive. You can see how a woman who needs to be pleased to the degree the ebu gogo do could be threatening to a man with a wa-wa as small as this guy’s, can’t you?”
   Martin then knelt to the ground behind the male ebu gogo, reached his hand around the happy chattering creature, and with his thumb and forefinger, began to stroke the male ebu gogo’s tiny penis. The ebu gogo continued to laugh and chatter, but then all of a sudden he stopped, and his eyes grew wide as if he were discovering an entirely new sensation.
   When he thought that the ebu gogo’s penis had grown sufficiently erect, Martin stopped stroking it, tapped it on its butt again, pointed at Stephanie’s vagina, and said, “Coo-coo.”
   Stephanie was still lying on her back with spread legs, and her vagina was facing the male ebu gogo, who being only three feet tall, could look straight at it. The ebu gogo stared at her vagina for a few moments, smiled, and said,“Coo-coo!” Then he looked down at his own erect penis and said, “Wa-wa.” He looked at Stephanie’s vagina again and said, “Coo-coo.” He looked at his own penis again and said, “Wa-wa.” Then, he looked back and forth between Stephanie’s vagina and his own penis and said, “Coo-coo, wa-wa, coo-coo, wa-wa!”
   The cryptozoologists all stared at the ebu gogo’s tiny erect penis in horror, wondering if the ebu gogo would actually be able to take Stephanie with it, and unable to interfere because they were held against the walls of the cavern by the spears of the ebu gogo.
   Then the male ebu gogo walked up to Stephanie, stood between her spread legs, which were kept apart by the points of many spears, leaned over her resting his tiny hands on her stomach, and got his tiny penis inside of her vagina. Stephanie screamed and cried as the ebu gogo fucked her with short, quick, and rapid thrusts.
   Martin laughed and cried,“Yes! He is doing it! The ebu gogo is fucking her! They can have sex! Hooray!!!”
   Then the male ebu gogo came inside of Stephanie and collapsed on top of her, exhausted. The female ebu gogo removed their spear points from Stephanie’s body, but she just continued to lay there shaking and crying.
   Martin said,“Shhh. Shhh, stop crying, Stephanie. I know you hate it now. You will learn to like it, and then to love it. I promise. Your friend Doug has already learned to like it, and soon he will love it as much as I do.”
   Then Martin turned his head and called outside the cavern,“Doug, get in here.”
   Doug entered the tiny cavern. He was naked except for his pith helmet and boots, and rolls of fat hung over rolls of fat. His ass was a mass of cottage cheese-like cellulite. He was not under guard, and the ebu gogo did not treat him as a prisoner. Martin said,“Doug, tell these people how you have learned to like it.”
   Doug looked at the cryptozoologists, who were all held against the walls of the cavern at the points of many spears and said in a voice lacking inflection,“I like it. I hated it at first, but now I like it. You will all learn to like it too.”
   Martin said,“Show them Doug. Show them how you like it.” Then, Martin turned and said something in the ebu gogo language to a three and a half foot tall female ebu gogo. Many of the females in the cavern were pregnant and had bulging bellies, but this one had a slim waist. She approached Doug with the big,haughty grin of a dominatrix on her face as her breasts swung back and forth.
   Martin said,“Come on Doug, show your friends how much you like it.”
   The cryptozoologists, pinned to the walls of the cavern by many spears, watched in horror as Doug willingly had sex with the ebu gogo.
   Chapter 23
   Later, the six cryptozoologists, Lewis, Linda, Dr. Stern, Clare, Stephanie, and Charles were still in the cavern, guarded by many female ebu gogo with spears pointed at them, ready to be hurled at them if they made any untoward motion. Then, the ebu gogo parted to let Doug enter the cavern. They did not try to restrict his movements, because since he was having sex with them, they considered him one of their own. Doug looked at the captives and then looked away sheepishly and said,“Hi, guys.”
   Lewis said,“Doug, we have nothing to discuss with you, so you can leave our presences immediately.”
   Doug said,“But Mr. Dare.”
   Lewis said,“Don’t you Mr. Dare me. Get out of here.”
   Doug said,“But why?”
   Incredulous, Linda said,“Why? You are a traitor to humanity, that’s why.”
   Doug said,“No I’m not.”
   Then Stephanie said to her ex-lover, with hurt and pain in her voice,“Yes you are. We all saw you. You did it with an ebu gogo, and you liked it. In fact, I think you love it.”
   Doug looked straight down at the ground. He said,“No, I don’t love it. I don’t like it even. I hate it. I only pretend to like it so Martin and the ebu gogo don’t kill me, and so they don’t kill you.”
   Clare said,“Really?” Then she turned to Stephanie and said encouragingly, “That kind of makes him a hero.”
   Stephanie said,“Eh, kind of. But there’s a way he could become a real hero and get us all out of this.”
   Doug said,“What is it?”
   Stephanie said,“Last night, when you brought me to your tent, what did you show me?”
   Doug grinned ear to ear and said,“I showed you a lot of things.”
   Stephanie said,“But besides that.”
   Doug looked nervously at Lewis and said,“I don’t know if I should say.”
   Stephanie said,“You showed me your firecrackers.”
   Lewis shouted,“You brought firecrackers???”
   Doug said,“Yeah. I was planning on setting them off. I thought it would be fun.”
   Lewis crossed his arms and said,“Well, everybody has been accusing me of being a liar, but I guess the real liars are Doug and Stephanie.”
   Stephanie said,“Would you all just listen? You know how when Linda fired her gun it scared the ebu gogo so much that they all fell onto their backs screaming?”
   Doug said,“It did?”
   Stephanie said,“Well, you weren’t there for that. But if they react that way to the sound of a gun, imagine how they would react to the sound of a firecracker that sounds like a whole lot of guns!”
   Doug said,“I’ve got to go get those firecrackers right away.”
   Dr. Stern said,“No. We need to formulate a plan first. That’s the problem with you cryptozoologists. You always rush into things without making a plan and without weighing the consequences.”
   Doug said,“But we don’t have the time to make a plan. We don’t have the time to weigh the consequences even. The reason I came here was to tell you that the ebu gogo are planning on raping all of you in less than an hour in a giant orgy!”
   Dr. Stern said,“Then forget everything I just said. Go now, run as fast as you can, and get those firecrackers.”
   Doug said,“I won’t let you down.” Then, he turned and left the cavern, and walked through the twisting maze of caves until he was on the surface of the island of Flores.
   Once he reached the surface Doug ran as fast as he could, given that it was night, he was naked except for his pith helmet and boots, and he was grossly overweight, through the jungle. He lost his way a couple of times and by the time he reached the tents, he had no idea how much time had gone by. He hoped it was a small enough amount of time that he could get back to the caves before the ebu gogo had their way with his friends. As he unzipped his tent, he couldn’t believe that he had only put it up the night before. It seemed like so much time had gone by. He got the firecrackers out of his pack as well as a lighter, put on a pair of clothes consisting of khaki pants, and a beige shirt and jacket, and ran back through the jungle towards the caves.
   Meanwhile, back in the network of caves that runs beneath the island of Flores, Martin entered the little cavern where the other cryptozoologists were being held, flanked by a bunch of ebu gogo. Martin said,“Come. We are going to bring you to a larger chamber, one that may be a bit more comfortable for you.”
   Charles screamed in panic,“No! He wants to force us to fuck those ebu gogo. I won’t do it. I won’t fuck an ebu gogo.”
   Charles made a motion to lunge past the ebu gogo guards to the entrance of the cavern, but an ebu gogo rammed her spear through his gut. Charles fell to the ground and began to bleed out.
   Martin said,“What a shame. He was very tall. He could have given the ebu gogo his height. But you Lewis, you can give the ebu gogo your strength, you Dr. Stern, you can give the ebu gogo your intelligence, and you Clare, you can give the ebu gogo your beauty. You all have gifts to give to the ebu gogo. Now come. You will all become my brothers and sisters.”
   Martin said something to the ebu gogo and they poked and prodded the naked cryptozoologists out of the cavern, through the network of caves, and into a larger cavern that was crowded with ebu gogo, both female and male. Martin said to the female cryptozoologists,“Don’t worry. I have taught the females how to be patient with the males. They will help the males enter you, just as I helped the male enter Stephanie. That way we won’t have to kill you, and I will have brothers and sisters.”
   The ebu gogo that had prodded them into the cavern were all pregnant. But the females crowding the cavern waiting impatiently for them had slim bellies. The pregnant ebu gogo with spears prodded the cryptozoologists into the frothing sea of ebu gogo, and the ebu gogo touched them all over with their little hands. The faces of the cryptozoologists were twisted with humiliation and fear as ebu gogo climbed all over them and pulled them to the rock floor of the cavern.
   Martin’s eyes and the eyes of the pregnant ebu gogo with spears were on the scene that was happening on the floor, so nobody noticed when Doug stepped into the doorway until he said in a loud voice, “Hey ebu gogo!!!”
   Some heads turned and saw Doug as he lit a string of firecrackers and tossed it into the cavern. The firecrackers went off!“popopopopopopopopopop!!!!”
   The hundreds of ebu gogo all fell onto their backs, waved their arms and legs in the air and screamed,“Eeeeeee, Eeeeeee, Eeeeeee!”
   Martin jumped around and yelled,“I told you all not to get scared! It’s only a noise! Get up! Get up!”
   But the ebu gogo continued to roll around on their backs and scream as the firecracker continued to pop.
   The cryptozoologists all got to their feet. Linda said,“The pregnant ones. We have to get them while they are all on their backs.
   Linda rushed to where the pregnant guards were rolling back and forth on the floor, grabbed a spear out of one of their hands, and stabbed it in its round, pregnant stomach, running the stone tip of her spear through the developing fetus within its womb. The rest of the cryptozoologists followed Linda’s lead, grabbed spears, and stabbed the pregnant ebu gogo in their bulging bellies, killing the fetuses within.
   The popping firecracker slowly died and stopped popping. The ebu gogo on the ground shook weary heads as they began to recover. Quickly, Doug lit another string of firecrackers and it went off,“popopopopopopopopopop!!!!”
   The few ebu gogo that had gotten onto their feet all fell onto their backs again, and all the ebu gogo waved their arms and legs in the air again and screamed,“Eeeeeee, Eeeeeee, Eeeeeee!”
   The cryptozoologists continued to stab pregnant ebu gogo in their bellies, killing them and the human-ebu gogo hybrids growing inside their wombs, as Doug continued to light firecrackers. Martin, who was still trying to get the ebu gogo to their feet, suddenly saw what the cryptozoologists were doing. He ran over to them waving his arms in the air and screamed,“Hey!”
   Lewis, Clare, and Linda rushed Martin at once while Stephanie and Dr. Stern continued the exhausting work of stabbing pregnant ebu gogo in their bellies.
   Lewis, Clare and Linda threw Martin to the ground and kicked him over and over again all at once with their heavy boots as they screamed,“You fucking furry! Fucking furfag! Fuck! Fuck!”
   The firecracker began to die down. Doug said,“Uh, guys…”
   But the cryptozoologists all ignored him as they continued to surround Martin and kick him and to stab the pregnant females. The firecracker stopped completely and the ebu gogo began to recover. Again Doug said,“Guys.”
   Linda turned to Doug and said,“Hey, how about lighting another one?”
   Doug said,“That’s what I’m trying to tell you. I can’t get my lighter to work. See?”
   Doug demonstrated by flicking his lighter a few times. There was a little spark, but no flame.
   The ebu gogo were beginning to get to their feet. Lewis cried,“We have to get out of here!”
   Linda looked Martin right in the eye, said,“Fucking furry,” and stabbed him through the heart with her spear. This time, nobody objected.
   The cryptozoologists all rushed out of the cavern gripping their spears. They were not pursued by the ebu gogo as they made their way through the network of caves and spilled out into the rainforest jungle above.
   Perhaps the reason the ebu gogo didn’t go after the cryptozoologists was because Doug still held the firecrackers in his hands, and they had learned to fear them. Or maybe the ebu gogo were too upset by the loss of the pregnant ebu gogo and their unborn children to go after them. Or maybe they were too upset by the death of Martin.Or maybe they all just figured they had suffered enough losses and that it wasn’t worth it to go after the humans and suffer more.
   Once they had made their way through the jungle for awhile without having been given chase Linda said to Dr. Stern,“Do you think you and Stephanie got the last of the pregnant ones?”
   Dr. Stern said,“As far as I could see, but there’s no way to know for sure.”
   Doug said,“I’m pretty sure you did.”
   Chapter 24
   The cryptozoologists reached the Keo village. After the week had passed, the boat returned to take them to the island of Java, where Lewis’s jet, theDare to Discover, was sitting in the Jakarta International Airport waiting to take them home.
   Doug and Stephanie were off by themselves on the bow of the ship, having what must have been an awfully awkward conversation. After all, both of them had had sex with ebu gogo, and Stephanie had accused Doug of loving it. But it looked as if they had ironed out their differences, as they were smiling as they talked to one another, and even laughed occasionally.
   Meanwhile, Dr. Stern, Lewis, Linda, and Clare all sat together. Dr. Stern said,“I have been such an idiot.”
   Clare said,“What do you mean?”
   Dr. Stern said,“In my paper that I disowned, ‘The Descendants of Pongo Abelii,’ I argued that human beings had evolved from orangutans, and then an isolated population of human beings devolved into chimpanzee. People told me that I was crazy, and that devolution of that sort was impossible. They said the very idea smacked of racism. So I listened to them, and I recanted all my ideas and from then on only espoused accepted mainstream opinions. But in the remarkable story that Martin told, he said that orangutans devolved from an isolated population of Homo erectus. Don’t you see? If that is possible,then devolution is possible, and therefore my idea about chimpanzees devolving from human beings is also possible. What if all of the great apes are the product of devolution? If I had only continued my research along the intellectual path I set out on instead of allowing myself to be forced in another direction, I could have discovered great things. I have wasted my life, and it is all the fault of the arrogance of the scientific community. Lewis Dare, I owe you an apology. You were right about science, and I was wrong. Science has become just another religion. Thank you for getting me firedfrom the Museum of Natural History. It is the best thing that has ever happened to me.”
   Clare had been sitting in between her two parents, but now she switched seats so that she was sitting next to Dr. Stern and said,“Hey, I like what you just said. You know, I get the impression that you don’t have much of a life to go back to in London, and I just love showing people around LA. What if you come back to Los Angeles with me, and I can give you a tour?”
   Dr. Stern smiled and said,“I would love a tour of Los Angeles.”
   Lewis said,“And I can’t wait to go to New York, where I will announce to the entire world that I have discovered the ebu gogo.”
   Linda said,“How many times do I have to remind you that I discovered them first?”
   Lewis said,“And how many times do I have to remind you that you don’t have any proof?”
   Linda said,“Well, where’s your proof? It seems to me you must have lost that cast you made of the ebu gogo footprint when the ebu gogo took your clothes.”
   Lewis smiled. He unzipped a backpack he had taken onboard with him, and out hopped a laughing, chattering male ebu gogo. Lewis said,“This morning before the boat came I took a walk in the jungle and picked up this little guy.”
   Linda frowned and said,“Well, I guess that’s that, Lewis. You are going to get all of the credit, and I am going to get none.”
   Dr. Stern said,“Now just wait a minute. I think we all brought our own unique strengths, as well as weaknesses to this endeavor. What if we say that we all discovered the ebu gogo?”
   Lewis repeated what Dr. Stern had said, trying the words in his mouth to see if he liked the way they felt.“We all discovered the ebu gogo.” Then, he turned to Linda and said, “We all discovered the ebu gogo. I like that.”
   Linda took Lewis’s hand. She looked him in the eye and said, “I like the way that sounds very much. We all discovered the ebu gogo.”
   Then Clare said,“Uh, guys? I hate that the youngest person here has to be the voice of reason, but we can’t tell anybody that we discovered the ebu gogo. Their existence must be kept secret.”
   Everybody gave Clare inquisitive looks and asked,“Why?”
   Clare said,“Jack was a furry, who wanted to have sex with an ebu gogo. And Martin was a repressed furry, who had sex with a lot of ebu gogo. Well, there are a whole lot more furries out there who, if they learned that the ebu gogo exists, would want to go to Flores and have sex with them. And as you all know, the ebu gogo are more than willing partners. I’m sure you can all imagine what would happen then.”
   Lewis gave a disappointed sigh and said“You’re right. Mankind is not ready for the ebu gogo.” Then he added bitterly, “I don’t know if mankind will ever be ready.”
   Lewis picked up the ebu gogo by the nape of its neck and brought it to the edge of the boat. He said,“I’m sorry little guy, but you can’t come to New York with us,” and threw the ebu gogo overboard into the sea below. The boat continued on towards the island of Java while the happy, chattering male ebu gogo drowned in its wake.
   Contacts
   Thank you for readingEbu Gogo. If you enjoyed it, please leave a review to let others know.
   Not only do I write in different genres, sometimes I like to write from completely different belief systems. The book you just read has human evolution and genetic anthropology at its core. My last book,Expedition to Eden, is set in the Biblical Garden of Eden. You can find it here:https://www.amazon.com/dp/B082RG8T8Q
   I like to email my fans once a month to keep them up to speed. I have a lot of books and series in the works, in all different genres. In order to be the first to hear about them, you can join my newsletter here:http://eepurl.com/gGs-SX
   Copyright
   Copyright© 2020 J. Manfred Weichsel
   All rights reserved
   The characters, locations, and events portrayed in this book are fictitious. Any similarity to real persons, living or dead, is coincidental and not intended by the author.
   No part of this book may be reproduced, or stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without express written permission of the publisher.
   ISBN-13: 9781234567890
   ISBN-10: 1477123456
   Cover design by: Scott P.“Doc” Vaughn
   Library of Congress Control Number: 2018675309
   Printed in the United States of America

Взято из Флибусты, http://flibusta.net/b/596524
